Title: How Agents Ask for Permission: User Permissions for AI Agents, from Interfaces to Enforcement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13718v2

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:48:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# How Agents Ask for Permission: User Permissions for AI Agents, from Interfaces to Enforcement 

# Alexandra E. Michael University of Washington Franziska Roesner University of Washington 

# Abstract 

As AI agents gain prevalence, users are increasingly ex-posed to the risks such systems entail. Prompt injection at-tacks, as well as hallucination, can cause agents to leak private information to third parties. As autonomous systems, agents also present the more active danger of performing sensitive tasks, such as bank transactions, without the user’s intent or authorization. Recognizing this challenge, the agentic security commu-nity has developed numerous proposals for secure agentic systems. Much of this work has focused on product-level 

approaches, where agentic system developers determine and apply the same security policies and permissions to all users. Yet different users have different needs and preferences, neces-sitating support for user-level permissions policies in agentic AI systems. To understand how user-level permissions are handled in AI agent systems, we survey 21 proposals for agent permissions systems. From this review, we construct a taxonomy of how different systems specify user-level permissions policies, both at the user interface and internally; derive internal policies from user input; and enforce those policies at run-time. We then analyze five prominent commercial agents and compare their permissions handling to agentic permissions systems in the literature. We identify several high-level themes across the literature and commercial agents, as well as multiple gaps where future work is needed. 

# 1 Introduction 

AI agents are increasingly prevalent, as AI developers shift their focus from standalone LLM chatbots to whole frame-works integrating LLM planners and executors with third-party tools. Empowered by the adaptiveness and flexibility of LLMs, agentic AI systems take on a vast space of autonomous tasks, from coding and open-source development to managing email and writing blog posts. Yet just as AI agents inherit LLMs’ benefits, they also share, and amplify, their dangers. LLMs are subject to a wide range of risks, including, but certainly not limited to, prompt injection and jailbreaking, disclosing sensitive information, and simple hallucination [18, 42]. AI agents carry those same risks, and add the potential for substantially greater harms. A prompt-injected or hallucinating agent can use tools to expose sensitive information, wreak havoc on a user’s files, or even transfer their funds to third parties. Recognizing this challenge, researchers and AI companies alike have made the pursuit of more secure agentic systems a priority. The last two years alone have seen an explosion of proposals for secure agentic systems. These systems aim to mitigate AI agents’ risks by enforcing some security policy over their actions. Much of the agentic security literature has focused on global or product-level security policies, which are pre-defined in the agent framework and applied across all users. For example, an agentic security system might impose a global policy that prevents passport numbers from being sent to any websites other than recognized airlines. Yet “correct” security policies, or permissions, are often user- and context-dependent [11, 12]. One user might want an agent to share their passport information with a specialty travel booking ser-vice, one not listed in the global policy. Another, especially privacy-conscious, user might prefer to prohibit the agent from ever sharing their passport information, even with “authorized” sites. To address cases like these, a secure agentic system must support some form of user-level permissions policy. In this work, we seek to answer the questions: What is the state of the art on handling user-level permissions in agentic AI systems? And where should the agentic security community go from here? These questions are not only a matter of technical imple-mentation, but also user interaction. User-level permissions are, by definition, influenced by the user’s needs. This makes it crucial to understand when and how agentic permissions systems grant users control over their own permission poli-cies [57]. We break down our overarching goal into three research questions: 1arXiv:2607.13718v2 [cs.CR] 20 Jul 2026 RQ1. What interfaces do current proposals for secure agent permissions systems provide to users? 

RQ2. How do agent permissions systems in the literature internally specify and enforce user-level policies? (a) What is the structure of internal policy specifications, and (b) how are they derived from user-selected options? (c) To what extent do enforcement mechanisms depend on LLMs? 

RQ3. Where are there gaps in the work on user-level per-missions systems for AI agents, both (a) within the litera-ture and (b) between the literature and commercial agents? 

(c) What areas of agent permissions systems hold potential and need for future work? To answer these questions, we conduct a literature review of recently proposed secure agentic systems, specifically target-ing those that address user-level permissions in some capacity. From this survey, we construct a taxonomy of approaches in agentic systems to specifying permissions policies, both at the user interface and internally, deriving internal policies from user selections, and enforcing polices at run time. With this taxonomy, we then analyze five prominent commercial AI agents to understand how agent permissions systems used in practice compare to those in the literature. 

Scope. We consider any autonomously acting system that does not incorporate LLMs, as well as LLM-based systems that lack support for external tools, to be out of scope. We furthermore focus on prototypes that implement some form of user-level permissions or policies for agents. Agentic systems with no support for permissions, or which only support global or product-level permission policies, are out of scope. We identify several common goals in the literature, includ-ing minimizing user overhead, formalizing policy specifica-tions, and enforcing permissions deterministically. We also find substantial gaps: none of the proposals we review achieve all three of these goals, despite a few coming close. The com-mercial agents we evaluate fare even worse. We find they often force users to choose between high-overhead user-in-the-loop permissions enforcement, and LLM auto-reviewers with little transparency or user control. Commercial agents do, however, allow users to modify policies over time, a user control frequently overlooked in the literature. 

Our contributions: 

• A survey of recent proposals for handling user-level per-missions in the AI agent literature. • A taxonomy of approaches to specifying, deriving from user input, and enforcing user-level permissions policies in agentic systems. • A comparative analysis of permissions handling in five commercial AI agents to agentic permissions systems in the literature. • Important gaps and areas for future work on user-level permissions in agentic systems. We begin with a brief overview of AI agents, agent security, and related work (Section 2). Section 3 describes our method-ology. Section 4 details our taxonomy and survey results, followed by discussion and takeaways (Section 5). Section 6 contains limitations, and Section 8 concludes. 

# 2 Background 2.1 AI Agents 

In line with related work [28], we use “AI agent” and “agentic AI systems” interchangeably, to mean systems that use LLMs to plan and/or trigger calls to external tools. As a rule, AI agents under our notion also include some non-AI compo-nent, as necessary to effectuate the actual execution of tool calls [28, 35]. We sometimes shorten “AI agent” and “agentic AI systems” to “agent” or “agentic systems” for brevity. In context of this work, we exclusively use these terms to refer to the sort of LLM-based agentic AI systems described above, acknowledging that “agent” may have a broader meaning in other contexts [48, 56, 61]. Within this definition, AI agents may have a wide variety of different architectures, such as multi-LLM paradigms [19, 35, 59], and tool-calling protocols [5, 63]. AI agents also oc-cupy various different contexts: coding agents [8,41], chatbots augmented with OAuth connections [7, 24, 39], and agentic browsers [40, 45] are just a few examples. While the specifics of each agent necessarily influence its mechanisms for user-level permissions, we aim to develop a unified taxonomy of high-level approaches across agentic architectures and con-texts. Importantly, we distinguish between the overarching agen-tic AI system, or agent, and the LLM(s) used to plan and execute actions within it. Our focus is on permissions systems for agents as whole frameworks. We consider safety and secu-rity considerations for standalone LLMs [3, 46], an important research area in its own right, to be out of scope. 

# 2.2 User-Facing Permissions in Non-AI Sys-tems 

There is a long history of work on user-facing permissions for traditional, non-AI systems. Such permissions systems have traditionally been built on foundational security principles like least privilege (grant each entity only the minimum nec-essary permissions) and failing closed (when in doubt, deny permission) [47, 51]. Prominent approaches include access control lists (ACLs), where each resource (e.g., a file) carries a list of who can access it and how; and capabilities, which instead act as nontransferable tokens of authority. Both access control lists and capabilities appear in widely used permis-sions systems today, including the Unix file system (ACLs) and OAuth 2.0 (capabilities) [22]. 2Regardless of approach or context, user-facing permissions systems face a common challenge of balancing desired se-curity principles with usability: How easy is it for a user to specify permissions? And how likely is it that the permissions they select will match what they actually need? This problem is hard in part because appropriate permis-sions are context-dependent, and cannot generally be deter-mined ahead of time for all users [11, 12]. One solution is to ask the user themselves to determine their permissions policy. However, users overwhelmed by permissions or pri-vacy decisions are prone to over-granting permissions, in a phenomenon known as “privacy fatigue” [15, 27, 54]. Alter-natives, like automatically-granted permissions and trusted UI elements, avoid such interruptions, but come at a cost to transparency, user control, and least privilege [21]. AI agents represent a novel domain for permissions sys-tems, one that presents unique challenges while retaining many of the goals and tradeoffs of traditional systems [16]. Agentic permissions systems, like traditional ones, are still asked to enforce security principles like least privilege. And the security-usability tradeoff is more prominent than ever, amplified by the need to preserve as much of the agent’s run-time utility as possible. Unlike traditional systems, however, AI agents carry par-ticular challenges owing to their reliance on LLMs. These include the conflation of “code” (instructions) and data, which opens agents to prompt injection attacks, and LLMs’ inherent nondeterminism [18, 42]. Unlike deterministic systems, an AI agent may respond to the same instructions in arbitrarily many different ways. That unpredictability poses a particu-lar challenge to permissions systems, which must enforce a consistent policy on every possible set of actions. 

# 2.3 Agentic Security 

The growing field of agentic security seeks to address the risks of AI agents [16, 28]. These risks include not just the novel challenges posed by LLMs, but also the familiar dangers of heterogeneous systems, such as untrusted inputs, access to sensitive data, and the potential for destructive actions, to name a few. As background to the narrower space of user-level permissions in agents, we describe a few important agentic security approaches below. One line of work seeks to reign in AI agents by target-ing their core LLMs. AI guardrails constrain the output of a decision-making LLM by using a secondary model, typ-ically another LLM, to identify policy violations [1, 3, 46]. Meanwhile, dual- or multi-LLM systems like CaMeL create a separation of privilege by designating distinct LLMs for different tasks [19, 59]. For example, a planner LLM might determine actions in advance, while an executor handles un-trusted run-time inputs but cannot make decisions. LLM-focused safeguards provide valuable checks against prompt injection and hallucination, but they are not a panacea. AI guardrails offer limited protection against stronger, more adaptive attacks [38]. And privilege separation approaches are often forced to choose between permitting the planner to see untrusted data and maintaining the run-time flexibility that makes agents so useful [19]. Recognizing these short-comings, a surge of recent work draws from traditional se-curity approaches to implement more deterministic agentic security systems. These efforts range from mobile-style user-selected security policies [59, 60], to information flow con-trol [4,17,19,32,36,58], to custom domain-specific languages (DSLs) for agentic security policies [31, 44, 50, 55]. Agentic security is a recently emerged area, and so far, much of the literature focuses on internal, product-level mech-anisms for defining and enforcing security policies. Compara-tively less work has been devoted to the ways users interact with those policies. For instance, both CaMeL and F IDES 

presume that security policies are fixed in the agentic sys-tem’s architecture, without allowing those policies to shift according to users’ needs [17, 19]. F IDES ’ approach was later extended in P RUDENTIA to allow users to selectively over-ride policy violations, even as the policies themselves remain fixed. For CaMeL, however, any extension to user-specific permissions remains open for future work, as is a recurring pattern in agentic security systems [1, 4, 25, 36, 65]. 

# 3 Methods 3.1 Literature Survey 

To understand the current space of approaches to user-level agent permissions, we reviewed a total of 21 systems and proposals from 2024 – 2026, including 3 peer-reviewed pub-lications, 18 pre-prints, 1 and one open-source system without an associated paper [2]. The initial literature search took place during April and early May 2026, with a small number of pa-pers added subsequently (see below). We identified these works by beginning with a small set of influential papers, e.g., [44,50,55], then recursively following citation paths (“snowballing”) to incorporate those papers’ related works. This process resulted in an initial pool of 26 pa-pers and open-source systems. From this pool, we eliminated 8 systems as out of scope, under the following criteria: • They targeted standalone LLMs rather than tool-calling AI agents; • They did not propose or implement any concrete frame-work, mechanism, or technique relating to permissions policies in agentic systems; or • They did not support or address user-level permissions policies, only policies set at a global or product level. 

> 1Two of these, PCAS and FORGE, are different iterations of the same work [43, 44]. We reviewed PCAS prior to FORGE’s release, and retained it in our analysis due to the substantial architectural and design differences between the two.

3Finally, we considered four additional pre-prints that were posted recently and identified after completing our initial lit-erature search. One of these was out of scope, while the other three we added to our analysis, resulting in our final set of 21 papers and systems. We reviewed each paper in this set for high-level themes, recording detailed notes on each proposal’s approach to handling user interfaces, internal specifications, and enforcement of permissions. 

3.1.1 Taxonomization 

We developed our agent permissions system taxonomy (Ta-ble 1) through a process of iterative refinement. The taxonomy development and paper categorization process was undertaken primarily by the first author, with periodic feedback from the other authors. We began by proposing a sketch of taxonomies for (a) policy specifications, (b) derivation of internal specifi-cations from user selections, and (c) enforcement mechanisms. Each initial sketch consisted of 4-6 levels, with higher lev-els roughly corresponding to greater user control over, and predictability of, the policy and its enforcement. We then reviewed each paper in our initial pool of 26, set-ting aside those we ruled out of scope and identifying tentative taxonomy placements for the remaining 18. During this initial pass, we occasionally paused to refine the taxonomy to better reflect the themes emerging from the literature. Each time we refined the taxonomy, we returned to the previously reviewed papers to validate their placements and adjust them, if needed. While most refinements were minor, we notably added the threat model portion of the taxonomy during this stage. We repeated this process of refinement and validation un-til all 18 initial papers had been reviewed. At this point, we finalized the taxonomy and performed a penultimate valida-tion pass to ensure all placements remained stable. When we later placed the three additional papers for our final set of 21, we once again refined and validated the taxonomy. This last refinement only required adding one new category to our taxonomy of threat model adversaries, and did not affect any existing papers’ placements. 

# 3.2 Commercial Agent Walkthroughs 

To understand how prominent in-use agents fit into the space of agent permissions, we evaluated five commercial agents across two companies and three modalities: Web chatbots with OAuth connections (Claude [7], ChatGPT [39]), desk-top agents (Claude Cowork [9], Codex [41]), and an agentic browser (ChatGPT agent mode [39]). Our commercial agent investigation took place in the latter half of May and first week of June 2026, and used Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5, and GPT-5.4-Mini. Inspired by the walkthrough method of app analysis [34], we applied the following process to each agent: 1. Set up or install the agent in a clean environment (e.g., a private browsing window or isolated VM), using an account created for this purpose. 2. Identify the permissions settings (UI) initially available through menus. 3. Grant a small number of permissions. For chatbots with OAuth connections, we granted access to an experiment-specific Gmail account. For desktop agents, we granted access to a local file folder (e.g., the Desktop). The agen-tic browser had no permissions available to grant. 4. Ask the agent to complete tasks that it both should and should not be able to accomplish under the current set-tings. If multiple settings are available for policy enforce-ment, repeat under each one. 5. If possible, attempt to revoke previously granted permis-sions, then ask the agent to attempt tasks that require the revoked permissions. Due to the closed-source nature of most commercial agents, we rely on our observations of the agent’s output and UI to determine the results of each user-level change to permissions. In one chatbot’s case (Claude), we were able to glean addi-tional insights from monitoring the browser’s console log, where it logged its MCP tool calls. 

# 4 Results 

Agent permissions systems in the literature represent a wide range of approaches to specifying, deriving, and enforcing user-specific permissions policies. Nonetheless, we identify three primary themes as recurring goals among permissions systems: (1) Near-zero user overhead in specifying policies, whether by permitting natural language input or inferring policies from implicit context. (2) Formally grounded specifications ,based on established principles such as information flow con-trol [29,32,58] or type safety [31,44,50,55]. And (3) determin-istic enforcement , avoiding the potential for nondeterministic errors in AI guardrails. Across the 21 systems we review from the literature, all emphasize one or more of these themes, but none fully achieve all three . On the other hand, few of the 5 commercial agents we review clearly achieve any of the three goals. What many of them do prioritize, however, is: (4) Continuous user control 

over permissions policies, even after initial specification time. By contrast, few of the proposals in the literature focus on continued user control or transparency, indicating a sub-stantial gap between the directions of academic research and commercial systems on priorities in agent permissions sys-tems. We begin this section by highlighting notable elements of our taxonomy. We then describe the threat models and themes 4Category In the literature In commercial agents Threat model: Adversary 

None specified [14, 31, 33, 44, 55, 62] –External data sources , excluding third-party tools, the agent, and its provider (implied by “benign but fallible agent”) [29, 37] –Third-party tools [10, 32, 50, 52, 59, 60] –Agent provider [52] –Benign but fallible agent subject to prompt injection and/or hallucination [2, 23, 43, 49, 50, 52, 53, 58, 60, 66] –

> Threat model: Target

None specified [14, 31, 33, 44, 55, 62] –Data exfiltration to external parties, excluding other forms of data/control flow (implied by “general task flow”) [10, 52, 60] –General task flow : combined data/control flow at execu-tion time [2, 23, 29, 32, 37, 43, 49, 50, 53, 58, 59, 66] –

> Specification (UI)

None (no user-facing specification mechanism) [23, 31, 33, 37, 53] ChatGPT agent mode [39] Natural language [2, 10, 14, 43, 49, 62] –Privilege labels, e.g., high (secure) vs. low (public) [29, 32, 58] –Fixed selection from a set of policies, e.g., mobile-style permissions [49, 52, 59, 60, 66] Claude, Claude Cowork, Codex, ChatGPT chat mode [7,9,39,41] Structured constraints , or flexible rules within a pre-defined set of actions or conditions [44, 50] –Arbitrary rules, permitting fully user-defined actions [55] –

> Specification (internal)

None (no internally tracked specification) [10] –Natural language [62] –Privilege labels, e.g., high (secure) vs. low (public) [29, 32, 58, 66] –Fixed selection from a set of policies, e.g., mobile-style permissions [49, 52, 59, 60] –Structured constraints , permitting flexible rules within a pre-defined set of actions or conditions [2, 14, 23, 31, 33, 37, 43, 44, 50, 53] –Arbitrary rules, permitting fully user-defined actions [55] –

> Derivation

None (no UI-to-internal translation occurs) [10] ChatGPT agent mode [39] AI prediction from user query and/or implicit context [23, 31, 33, 37, 49, 53, 60] Claude [7] AI compilation from user-provided specification [2, 14, 43, 49] –Deterministic compilation from user-specified policy [58, 66] –Exact use of user-specified policy [29, 32, 44, 49, 50, 52, 55, 59, 62] Claude, Claude Cowork, Codex, ChatGPT chat mode [7,9,39,41] 

> Enforcement

None (relies on best-effort compliance from the agent) [31] Claude Cowork [9] External mechanisms, defined by third-party tools [49] –LLM guardrail determines compliance [2, 10, 33] Claude, Codex [7, 41] AI-generated per query , e.g., enforcement code gener-ated separately for each query [14, 32, 62] –AI-generated from policy, only once [55] –Non-AI automation : automated violation detection with-out use of AI; generally deterministic [2, 23, 29, 37, 43, 44, 50, 52, 53, 58, 59, 66] Claude [7] User-in-the-loop: User indicates violations in real time [29, 52, 59] Claude, Claude Cowork, Codex, ChatGPT chat mode [7,9,39,41] Table 1: Our taxonomy of user-specific agent permissions systems, covering threat models; policy specifications, both user-facing and internal; approaches to deriving internal policies from user-specified ones; and run-time enforcement mechanisms. 5we identify across agent permissions systems in the literature, followed by a discussion of commercial agents. 

# 4.1 Taxonomy 

Table 1 contains our taxonomy, split across threat models and approaches to specifying, deriving, and enforcing policies. Apart from those labeled “None”, the categories are generally not mutually exclusive. We describe a few notable categories here, and refer the reader to the table for the full list. 

4.1.1 Threat Models 

Threat models for traditional, non-AI systems have histori-cally distinguished between data flow, or the movement of information, and control flow, concerning the instructions executed by a program. To an AI agent, however, data and control flow are unavoidably intertwined: instructions are merely another form of data, and data itself often contains instructions [35, 42]. We therefore consider data and control flow as one unit in our threat model taxonomy, termed task flow . We define task flow as the combined flow of information and instructions over the course of an agent solving any given task. The task flow category includes any threat model that broadly targets data, control flow, or both. The threat models portion of our taxonomy also contains two mutually exclusive categories (other than “None”). A small number of papers explicitly limit their adversary to only include external data sources, or their target to only in-clude data exfiltration. Both threat models are implied by a more expansive one: external data sources are covered by benign-but-fallible agent adversaries, while data exfiltration is implicit in general task flow. Because the great majority of papers with specified threat models fall into the more general categories, we list only the papers that use these categories exclusively. 

4.1.2 Specifications 

We distinguish between several forms of policy specification, including privilege labels, fixed selections, structured con-straints, and arbitrary rules. Privilege or security labels are often used to distinguish between private and public data in information flow control systems. Generally, such systems fol-low a standard policy: “low” (public) data is allowed as input to tools labeled “high” (private), but not vice versa [29,32,58]. In practice, we find that privilege label systems offer users only limited control over permissions policies. The user can sometimes indicate the label of their own query, but often have little or no control over the labels assigned to third-party tools [29, 32]. 

Fixed selection refers to systems where users may se-lect any policy from a set of pre-defined options. This of-ten takes the form of mobile-style permissions, i.e., “Al-ways”/“Once”/“Never” [59, 60]. Structured constraints , by contrast, are more flexible. We use this category for systems where policies must operate over a pre-defined set of actions or targets, but can be nearly anything within those constraints. Progent’s programmable policies, which require every policy to select from a set of three actions to take upon violation, are one example [50]. Finally, we classify specifications where policies can be truly anything under arbitrary rules . This category includes only one system, A GENT SPEC [55], which allows users to write arbitrary functions as policies. While each system has at most one form of internal specifi-cation, user interface specification categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, AC4A [49] provides two different ways for users to specify their policy (natural language or direct selection from a list of options). We list it under both categories accordingly. 

4.1.3 Derivation and Enforcement 

Derivation categories refer to the means by which an agent permission system determines its internal policy from a user-specified one. Enforcement, meanwhile, covers the run-time mechanism a system uses to detect policy violations. As with UI specifications, some systems provide multiple derivation or enforcement approaches and are listed for every option they support. We refer the reader to Table 1 for a brief description of each category. 

# 4.2 Themes in the Literature 

4.2.1 Threat Models 

Nearly a third of the proposals in our survey do not specify a threat model [14, 31, 33, 44, 55, 62]. Among those that do, most define the agent itself as the source of threat, not out of malicious intent, but rather due to external prompt injection, hallucinations, or both [2, 23, 43, 49, 50, 53, 58, 60, 66]. Some proposals explicitly trust third-party tools [29, 49, 66], while not necessarily extending that trust to those tools’ output. Others consider tools to be an adversary [10, 32, 50, 59, 60]. The goal for most of the systems we review is to prevent agent actions (i.e., tool calls) that fall outside the intended, or authorized, task flow. The three exceptions are AirGapA-gent [10], GAAP [52], and Wu et al.’s proposal for automating data permissions [60], whose narrower threat models seek only to prevent exfiltration of sensitive data. 

4.2.2 Low User Overhead Through Natural Language or Contextual Policies 

Nearly two-thirds (12) of the systems we review from the literature make design choices to avoid users having to specify permissions policies directly. In 6 proposals, this comes in 6the form of taking user permissions as natural language [2, 10, 14, 43, 49, 62]. In such cases, the user must still dictate their intended policy, but avoid both the expressiveness limits of selecting a policy from a fixed set of permissions, and the learning curve of writing policies in JSON or a domain-specific language (DSL). 5 permissions systems go even further by eschewing user input for policies entirely [23, 31, 33, 37, 53]. Instead, these systems predict policies from implicit context , typically the contents of the user query, or information about the agent’s execution state. Wu et al.’s proposal [60] similarly seeks to predict permissions policies, in their case by using a limited set of user-selected permissions decisions to train a classifier for future decisions. Finally, P RUDENTIA [29] explicitly identifies low user over-head as a goal. Yet P RUDENTIA relies on the user to make policy decisions in real time, making its demands on users significantly higher than the other systems listed here. In this regard, P RUDENTIA is more in line with commercial agents, which similarly rely on a user-in-the-loop approach (§4.3). Among the systems that minimize user overhead, 5 also emphasize deterministic enforcement mechanisms (§4.2.4), while 2 offer formal grounding for their specifications (§4.2.3). None, however, provide both. 

4.2.3 Formally Grounded Specifications 

11 of the systems we review ground their policy specifica-tions in formalized approaches to security. Approaches range from defining policies in terms of security labels for informa-tion flow control [29, 32, 58], to using typed DSLs or Datalog (structured constraints or arbitrary rules) to ensure policies are well-formed [31,43,44,50,55]. ShieldAgent [14] defines poli-cies in the form of linear temporal logic, while MiniScope [66] uses an Integer Linear Program (ILP) solver to identify the smallest set of necessary privileges. Lastly, GAAP [52] per-forms information flow control analysis on code an agent generates to perform its task. We observe that some systems appear to provide a foun-dation for formal specifications, yet fall short of defining the formalism itself. AC4A [49] notably describes its approach in terms of “resource types”, implying a formal type system. However, the AC4A paper omits discussion of what said for-malism would actually entail. Even among the systems that do provide formalized speci-fications, none prove the correctness of their policy enforce-ment . f -secure [58] and FORGE [43] both provide formal security analyses of their overall architecture, including both specification and enforcement, but the implemented systems themselves remain unverified. GAAP’s run-time analysis of agent-generated code appears to come the closest, but even then, GAAP’s authors do not claim to have implemented for-mally verified enforcement [52]. 

4.2.4 Deterministic Policy Enforcement 

The final theme we identify in the literature is of determinis-tic enforcement mechanisms, implemented by 12 out of 21 systems [2, 23, 29, 37, 43, 44, 50, 52, 53, 58, 59, 66]. We ob-serve deterministic enforcement across two categories: (1) Automated enforcement mechanisms that do not involve an LLM or other AI models. While one could theoretically im-plement nondeterministic or heuristic enforcement without using LLMs, in practice, none of the systems we review take this approach. And (2) “user-in-the-loop” enforcement, which preemptively asks the user to make a policy decision rather than attempting to detect violations automatically. We distinguish user-in-the-loop enforcement from systems that escalate to the user when a policy violation has already 

been detected. The latter is an implementation decision, and we consider it orthogonal to the means of detecting viola-tions in the first place. Among the literature we review, only three systems implement a user-in-the-loop approach: I SO -

> LATE

GPT [59], P RUDENTIA [29], and GAAP [52]. Both ISOLATE GPT and GAAP avoid user-in-the-loop enforcement where possible, by saving user decisions as policy updates and deterministically applying them to subsequent queries. PRUDENTIA , on the other hand, asks the user to override its default policies separately for every query. We specifically define deterministic enforcement as ex-cluding systems that use an LLM to generate enforcement code. While most such systems seek to shield the enforce-ment models from untrusted inputs, doing so completely is not always possible, especially when the policy-enforcing code is generated anew for each query [14, 32, 62]. Furthermore, nondeterminism in the code-generating models remains a source of risk. On the other hand, we classify FORGE [43] as providing deterministic enforcement, even though it permits LLM usage by way of user-defined external code. Users must explicitly enable the LLM usage in question, and FORGE’s enforcement mechanism remains deterministic by default. Finally, AC4A [49] does not automatically include LLMs in its enforcement. However, AC4A requires each third-party tool to provide its own permissions enforcement function, which AC4A relies upon as a ground-truth source of pol-icy enforcement decisions. With third parties controlling the means of enforcement, there is no way for an individual user to be certain their policy is enforced deterministically. Thus we exclude AC4A from this category. 

# 4.3 Commercial Agents 

We conducted walkthrough-style [34] investigations of five commercial agents (Claude, Claude Cowork, ChatGPT chat mode, ChatGPT agent mode, and Codex) with over the course of three weeks in late May and early June 2026. We evaluated each agent’s user interface for specifying permissions poli-cies, as well as how they appeared to enforce those policies 7Figure 1: Selecting Gmail permissions in Claude. 

Figure 2: A logged MCP request from Claude indicating that no approval is required to create an email draft, despite having set the permissions for creating a draft to “Needs approval”. 

Figure 3: Claude Cowork requesting permission to delete files in the workspace folder. Contrary to the warning, beginning a new task does not remove the permission from the old one, which retains the permission if restarted later. at run-time. Because all five commercial agents are closed-source, we could not assess their internal policy specifications. Nonetheless, we glean several insights from their UIs and vis-ible enforcement approaches. 

Figure 4: Enforcement settings in Codex, where they apply to all actions within the current session. 

4.3.1 Continuous User Control, But High Overhead 

Despite the prominence of low user overhead as a focus in the literature, we find little sign of this theme in our walkthroughs of Claude, Claude Cowork, ChatGPT (chat and agent mode), and Codex. On the contrary, we found a tendency for commer-cial agents to incur high user overhead with frequent requests for confirmation, sometimes even when the permission had been previously granted. We classify this behavior as user-in-the-loop enforcement, where agents require users to explicitly approve or deny ac-tions in real time. All four of the Claude chatbot, ChatGPT chat mode, ChatGPT agent mode, and Codex relied on user-8in-the-loop enforcement at least some of the time. Claude and Codex default to this method, but also employ LLM guardrails for auto-reviewing actions. ChatGPT, on the other hand, required explicit user approval for all actions associated with a permissions policy. We found no way to turn this off, or indicate that approval had been granted in advance. The only workaround was in ChatGPT’s agent mode, which grants the LLM control over a remote browser. In this mode, ChatGPT could and would take actions in the remote browser, such as accessing Gmail, that required user-in-the-loop permissions to do locally. ChatGPT accom-plished this simply by not assigning any permissions policies to the remote browser at all, meaning no opportunity for users to approve or deny agent mode actions. 

4.3.2 Lack of Transparency 

The dichotomy between ChatGPT’s chat and agent modes illustrates another trend in commercial agents: When not relying on user-in-the-loop enforcement, they reach for the least transparent and least user-controllable alternatives. We observe this pattern across all five agents, most notably in Claude. As mentioned earlier, the Claude chatbot makes use of an LLM auto-reviewer. Yet this auto reviewer is not con-trolled via Claude’s standard permissions settings for each tool. Rather, we found that Claude uses LLM auto-review 

implicitly , without notifying the user or providing any setting to control it. 2

Claude provides a “Needs approval” setting that all but promises a user-in-the-loop approach to enforcement, espe-cially in contrast with its “Always allow” option (Figure 1). Yet it is under “Needs approval” that the agent sometimes 

automatically infers permission from the user’s message. For example, Claude autonomously approved the creation of an email draft even when we had selected “Needs ap-proval”, and even tagged its associated MCP query with 

approvalRequired: false (Figure 2). We observed this behavior especially often with the Gmail search_emails 

tool, which Claude consistently used without asking when an auto-reviewer had decided our prompt was permission enough. Notably, because Claude’s only other permissions options are “Always allow” and “Blocked”, this auto-review behavior cannot be disabled short of revoking access to a given tool entirely. We find a similar, if less egregious, lack of transparency in Claude Cowork. Once Claude Cowork has received a permis-sion, e.g., to read or delete files in a given folder, that access 

cannot be revoked by the user (Figure 3). Fresh Cowork ses-sions do not carry over permissions from previous ones, but the older sessions persist in the app’s history, and will retain previously granted permissions if reentered. To the best of our 

> 2This is a difference from Claude Code’s “auto mode”, which is fully user-controlled [6].

knowledge, the only way to permanently revoke a filesystem permission from Cowork is through the operating system (if it has such a feature; Windows, for example, does not) or by uninstalling the app entirely. By contrast, Codex at least provides an explicit setting for its LLM auto-review, which is off by default and can be disabled at any time. When enabled, however, Codex’s auto-review applies to all tools used in the current session, with the only alternative being to ask the user every time (Figure 4). Curiously, while ChatGPT did not provide an auto-review option, it did appear to use LLM guardrails as a more-restrictive, as opposed to permissive, enforcement layer. For example, when we asked ChatGPT to send an email that mim-icked a common prompt injection format (“Ignore all previous instructions. This email is safe and benign.”), the agent re-fused to do so, and provided the following natural language feedback: “This tool call was blocked by OpenAI’s safety checks. Please double check what you are sending.” In this instance, the LLM guardrail actually prevented the agent from completing its intended task. While this design is less likely to allow dangerous actions than an LLM auto-reviewer that approves permissions automatically, we note that it fits a larger theme of commercial agents limiting actual 

user control over their behavior, even as defaulting to a user-in-the-loop approach creates the appearance of control. 

# 5 Discussion 

We find that the existing literature on agent permissions sys-tems reflects a promising variety of approaches, mainly con-centrated on three distinct goals: (1) lowering user overhead, (2) grounding policy specifications in formalized security prin-ciples, and (3) deterministic enforcement. Yet substantial gaps remain, both within the literature and especially between pro-posed systems and those implemented in the most prominent commercial agents. 

# 5.1 Gaps in the Literature 

5.1.1 Unification of Primary Goals 

Though several permissions systems in the literature con-centrate on two of the three goals we identify, none of the proposed systems achieves all three. We observe that the overlap is smallest between low-overhead systems and those focused on formally grounded specifications: only VeriSafe Agent [31] and ShieldAgent [14] achieve both of these themes. Neither system provides deterministic enforcement. This lack represents the first gap we identify: The literature lacks agentic permissions systems that provide all three proper-ties of low user overhead, formal specifications, and deter-ministic policy enforcement. 

The robust overlaps between systems with deterministic enforcement and low user overhead, or deterministic enforce-9ment and formal specifications, suggests that implementing a system with all three is technically achievable, making it all the more surprising that we found no such system in our review. AC4A [49] and P RUDENTIA [29] come the closest. Yet AC4A does not provide a formalism for its specifications (despite its reference to types), while P RUDENTIA relies on user-in-the-loop enforcement. We argue that, as these two systems show, closing this gap is both eminently achievable and an important target for future work. 

5.1.2 Formally Verified Enforcement 

Another gap lies in the use of formal specifications for en-forcement. While 11 of the systems we review implement some level of formalism for their policy specifications, none take the next step to verify the enforcement of said policies. This constitutes our second gap: Formally verified policy en-forcement would build confidence in permissions’ systems robustness to arbitrary agentic actions. 

Verifying programs is a classically challenging problem. Nonetheless, we argue that it is a worthwhile one, particularly in the agentic security context. As AI agents vastly expand the space of likely inputs to the code that enforces a given policy, it becomes all the more important to ensure that the enforcement code functions correctly, even in the presence of unanticipated inputs. Furthermore, since policy enforcement code is a relatively small part of any agent, focusing verifica-tion efforts there can provide outsized guarantees about the safety of a larger agentic system, even with its many untrusted components. 

5.1.3 Continuous User Control 

We identify a third gap in proposed permissions systems’ lack of continuous user control over permissions policies. For an agentic permissions system to truly empower users to express their intended policies, we believe it is crucial for users to have ways to update policies over time. Yet among the 21 systems we review, only six clearly provide ways for users to change or revoke permissions after the policy has been specified [2, 49, 50, 52, 59, 66]. Of those five, two only allow changes between sessions, not during [59, 66], which may pose challenges during single prolonged sessions. Separately, another two systems update permissions based on user choices to allow or deny specific actions at run-time, yet lack ways for users to prevent or revert those updates [10, 23]. These systems assume that a one-time decision extrapolates to all future circumstances—an presumption that may not always be accurate. 

5.1.4 Diversity of Threat Models 

The fourth and final gap we find in the literature is a lack of exploration of diverse threat models, such as adver-sarial users in multi-user systems, or the agent itself. As discussed in §4.2.1, nearly all the permissions systems we review with well-defined threat models share a single model: the adversary is agent misbehavior due to prompt injection or hallucination, targeting task flow. A small number of sys-tems target a strict subset of this model, e.g., by focusing only on data exfiltration [10, 52, 60]. Notably, nearly all of these systems assume that the agent itself is benign, and only misbehaves “on accident” or due to a third-party attacker. We argue, first, that future agent permissions proposals should take care to define their threat models explicitly, as sev-eral systems do not [14,33,44,55,62]. Second, we recommend that future work consider potential threat models beyond what is currently reflected in the literature. For example, adversarial users in a multi-user or multi-agent context are addressed by only GuardAgent [62] among the systems we review. Another potential adversary is the agent provider itself. Many agents operate by sending input data to the cloud to be processed, and privacy-conscious users may wish to prevent their private data from reaching the provider’s servers [26]. Among the 21 papers in our survey, only GAAP [52] accounts for this possibility by including the agent provider as an adversary. Targets beyond task flow similarly deserve further consid-eration. These could include denial of service, for example, or attempts to advertise an attacker’s product via malicious data poisoning [64]. Another alternative target is adversar-ial attacks that do not seek to compromise user privacy, but rather maliciously consume users’ limited tokens and funds to perform unintended tasks. 

# 5.2 Gaps Between the Literature and Commer-cial Systems 

Despite the extensive literature on formally grounded, deter-ministically enforced, and/or low-user overhead permissions systems, commercial agents largely fail to achieve any of the primary aims exhibited in the literature. This is a se-rious and substantial gap, particularly as the current state of commercial agents trades these goals for high user overhead, lack of transparency and user control over enforcement, or both. While commercial agents tend to do better than the litera-ture on providing practical ways for users to update permis-sions over time, that success has limits. Most agents rely on user-in-the-loop enforcement, which, though it theoretically maximizes user control over permissions policies, also creates a high risk of privacy fatigue—a phenomenon well known to increase users’ likelihood of ignoring warnings or over-granting permissions [15, 27, 54]. Often, the only alternative agents provide is an LLM auto-reviewer, with users given limited or no control over its use (§4.3.2). The net effect is that many commercial agents require users to either manually approve every action, or give up substantial portions of their control and autonomy in deciding permissions policies. We observe this pattern 10 directly in the five agents we evaluate, and note that it ap-pears in other agent settings as well. Claude Code’s auto mode [6], for example, avoids user-in-the-loop permissions by automatically allowing actions with only an LLM auto-reviewer for safety. Even more dangerous, Claude Code offers a bypassPermissions mode (a.k.a. YOLO) that lacks even the protection of an auto-reviewer. Substantial work is needed to build practical agentic per-missions systems that avoid this tradeoff, by letting users control policies when needed without overwhelming them with permissions pop-ups. Moreover, in light of commercial agents’ evident tendency to incorporate LLM-based permis-sions decisions without informing users (§4.3), any agentic permissions system must be transparent about when and how it uses LLMs, including and especially in its UI. 

# 6 Limitations 

Our survey of papers and proposals relating to user-level agent permissions represents only a snapshot of current work in the area. By the nature of our search methodology (§3), it is entirely possible there exist relevant papers not captured in our review. Furthermore, as this space is rapidly evolving, it is also possible—indeed, very likely—that additional relevant work has been completed even in the course of our analysis. Nonetheless, we believe our survey constitutes an important and valuable review of the state of user-level permissions in AI agents at the current moment in time. Separately, our ability to draw conclusions about commer-cial AI agent systems is limited by the lack of public infor-mation around how those systems function internally. While we can and do glean substantive insights by conducting walk-throughs of these systems from a user perspective, we ulti-mately cannot know the exact details of permissions handling in closed-source commercial agents. Commercial agent sys-tems are also rapidly evolving and may exhibit nondetermin-istic behavior, particularly where LLMs handle permissions policies directly. 

# 7 Related Work 

Kim et al.’s review of agentic AI attacks and defenses [28] provides a valuable survey of current attack vectors, mitiga-tions, and challenges in building secure agentic systems. Left unaddressed, however, is the question of whether and how 

users of agentic systems, as opposed to developers, may spec-ify individual policies within a larger security framework, or how those user-level policies are subsequently enforced. Zhang and Wang approach the user experience of agent security more directly [20]. In their survey of 18 web agents, Zhang and Wang identify widespread challenges in the web agent authorization landscape. These include a lack of gran-ularity in permissions schemes; deceptive or missing op-tions for revoking permissions; and a disconnect between “Interaction-Level” authorizations selected by users, and the “System-Level” authorizations that actually take effect, which are often much broader and more permissive [20]. In concurrent work, Wang et al. review the academic lit-erature and commercial agents, toward building a taxonomy of approaches to user intent alignment [57]. As an area of investigation, intent alignment is related to, but distinct from, the notion of user-level permissions. Intent alignment is the objective that an AI agent’s actions should “align” with the user’s intent. User-level permissions are an implementation-level mechanism that prospectively enables intent alignment, among other objectives. This difference is crucial in certain settings, such as cus-tomer service agents, where multiple users with heterogenous permissions and intents interact with a single agent. In such contexts, any one user’s intent should not unilaterally deter-mine their permissions policy . The alternative can have disas-trous consequences, empowering potentially malicious users to act beyond the bounds of their appropriate permissions [30]. User-level permissions are an important tool for balancing intent alignment with the need for appropriate restrictions on users’ own intended actions. Within the context of intent alignment, Wang et al. conclude that human-agent interaction is paramount [57]. As for user-level permissions, we agree that user control and transparency are important goals. Yet our results also highlight the need for more robust permissions policy enforcement without overly relying on user interaction (§5). In other concurrent work, Brigham et al. also consider user-facing permissions in agentic systems, developing an evalua-tion framework to empirically compare different permission approaches with respect to security- and usability-relevant cri-teria [13]. They evaluate implementations designed to capture different points in the design space, not existing commercial systems or other research prototypes, although they conceptu-ally compare some of the same systems that we consider. We complement and expand on past work by taking a broad lens to the space of user-level permissions for AI agents. We survey the recent literature to construct a platform-agnostic 

taxonomy of agent permissions interfaces, specifications, and derivation and enforcement mechanisms, geared toward iden-tifying when, how, and to what extent users can determine the permissions policies applied to their agent’s actions and access. We then identify cross-cutting themes in both the liter-ature and commercial agents, and provide recommendations on areas in need of further exploration. 

# 8 Conclusion 

We review 21 papers and open-source systems on implement-ing user-level permissions in agentic AI systems. From these papers, we develop a unified taxonomy of approaches to spec-ifying, deriving from user input, and enforcing user-level per-11 missions in agents. We then apply this taxonomy to an explo-ration of five commercial AI agents across web, desktop, and browser-use modalities. We identify four primary goals as themes across the liter-ature and commercial agents: low user overhead in setting permissions policies, formally grounded policy specifications, deterministic enforcement, and continuous user control of previously specified policies. While the first three themes feature prominently in the literature, we find them to be nearly absent from commercial agents. Even deterministic enforcement, while often present in a user-in-the-loop form, is counterbalanced by commercial agents’ tendency to rely on LLM guardrails as the sole alternative to constant permission requests—an alternative that users sometimes cannot even control. Yet the reverse is true of the last theme, continuous user control: though prominently featured in multiple commercial agents, few systems in the literature provide the user with options to edit or revoke previously granted permissions. We identify this as one of several substantial gaps in the academic literature, along with a dearth of systems combining all three of low user overhead, formal specifications, and deterministic enforcement; no exploration of formally verified enforcement; and a lack of diverse threat models. We strongly encourage researchers to explore agentic per-missions systems in these areas, towards creating a framework for user-level agent permissions that prioritizes not just us-ability and robustness, but also user control and transparency. We furthermore urge the AI industry to prioritize these goals in their commercial agents, particularly around closing the gap between the high overhead of user-in-the-loop policy en-forcement, and the low transparency and accountability of LLM-based enforcement. Use of AI agents will only continue to grow. As it does, it is incumbent upon academia and in-dustry alike to ensure the permissions that regulate agents’ actions are correct, transparent, and accountable to users. 

# 9 Acknowledgements 

This work was funded in part by gifts from Microsoft, includ-ing a Microsoft Grant for Customer Experience Innovation, and by NSF grant number DGE-2140004. Any opinions, find-ings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

# References 

[1] invariantlabs-ai/invariant, April 2026. Accessed 2026-04-22. [2] IronCurtain: A Personal AI Assistant Built Secure from the Ground Up, February 2026. Accessed 2026-04-23. [3] microsoft/aici, April 2026. Accessed 2026-04-23. [4] Nada Amin. metareflection/guardians, July 2026. original-date: 2026-04-09T06:18:01Z. [5] Anthropic. Introducing the model context protocol, 2024. Accessed 2026-06-09. [6] Anthropic. Choose a permission mode, 2026. Accessed 2026-07-06. [7] Anthropic. Claude, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [8] Anthropic. Claude code, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [9] Anthropic. Claude cowork, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [10] Eugene Bagdasarian, Ren Yi, Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Pe-ter Kairouz, Marco Gruteser, Sewoong Oh, Borja Balle, and Daniel Ramage. AirGapAgent: Protecting Privacy-Conscious Conversational Agents. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 3868–3882, Salt Lake City UT USA, December 2024. ACM. Accessed 2026-04-22. [11] A. Barth, A. Datta, J.C. Mitchell, and H. Nissenbaum. Privacy and contextual integrity: framework and applica-tions. In 2006 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P’06) , pages 15 pp.–198, 2006. [12] Sebastian Benthall, Seda Gürses, and Helen Nis-senbaum. Contextual integrity through the lens of com-puter science. Found. Trends Priv. Secur. , 2(1):1–69, December 2017. [13] Natalie Grace Brigham, Eugene Bagdasarian, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. Janus: A Playground for User-Involved Agentic Permission Management, July 2026. Accessed 2026-07-08. [14] Zhaorun Chen, Mintong Kang, and Bo Li. Shieldagent: Shielding agents via verifiable safety policy reasoning. 2025. [15] Hanbyul Choi, Jonghwa Park, and Yoonhyuk Jung. The role of privacy fatigue in online privacy behavior. Com-puters in Human Behavior , 81:42–51, 2018. [16] Mihai Christodorescu, Earlence Fernandes, Ashish Hooda, Somesh Jha, Johann Rehberger, Kamalika Chaudhuri, Xiaohan Fu, Khawaja Shams, Guy Amir, Jihye Choi, Sarthak Choudhary, Nils Palumbo, Andrey Labunets, and Nishit V. Pandya. Systems security foun-dations for agentic computing, 2026. Accessed 2026-07-04. 12 [17] Manuel Costa, Boris Köpf, Aashish Kolluri, Andrew Paverd, Mark Russinovich, Ahmed Salem, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Se-curing ai agents with information-flow control, 2025. Accessed 2026-06-02. [18] Badhan Chandra Das, M. Hadi Amini, and Yanzhao Wu. Security and privacy challenges of large language models: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. , 57(6), February 2025. [19] Edoardo Debenedetti, Ilia Shumailov, Tianqi Fan, Jamie Hayes, Nicholas Carlini, Daniel Fabian, Christoph Kern, Chongyang Shi, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Defeating Prompt Injections by Design, June 2025. Ac-cessed 2026-04-20. [20] Yi Evie Zhang and Ge Wang. Towards Human-Centered Agent Authorization: A Landscape Analysis of Com-mercial AI Agents. In Proceedings of the Extended Ab-stracts of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–10, Barcelona , Spain, April 2026. ACM. Accessed 2026-04-21. [21] Adrienne Porter Felt, Serge Egelman, Matthew Finifter, Devdatta Akhawe, and David Wagner. How to ask for permission. In 7th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Security (HotSec 12) , Bellevue, WA, August 2012. USENIX Association. [22] Nikos Fotiou, Vasilios A. Siris, and George C. Polyzos. Capability-based access control for multi-tenant systems using oauth 2.0 and verifiable credentials. In 2021 In-ternational Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN) , pages 1–9, 2021. [23] Haochen Gong, Chenxiao Li, Rui Chang, and Wenbo Shen. Secure and efficient access control for computer-use agents via context space, 2026. Accessed 2026-04-23. [24] Google. Google gemini, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [25] Haitao Hu, Peng Chen, Yanpeng Zhao, and Yuqi Chen. Agentsentinel: An end-to-end and real-time security de-fense framework for computer-use agents. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Com-puter and Communications Security , CCS ’25, page 3535–3549, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. [26] Muhammad Jazlan, Ethan Wang, Yash Vekaria, and Zubair Shafiq. Tracking conversations: Measuring con-tent and identity exposure on ai chatbots, 2026. Ac-cessed 2026-07-06. [27] Mark J. Keith, Courtenay Maynes, Paul Benjamin Lowry, and Jeffry Babb. Privacy Fatigue: The Effect of Privacy Control Complexity on Consumer Electronic Information Disclosure. Rochester, NY, December 2014. Social Science Research Network. Accessed 2026-06-10. [28] Juhee Kim, Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. SoK: Attack and Defense Landscape of Agentic AI Systems. In 

Usenix Security Symposium , 2026. [29] Aashish Kolluri, Rishi Sharma, Manuel Costa, Boris Köpf, Tobias Nießen, Mark Russinovich, Shruti Tople, and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Optimizing agent plan-ning for security and autonomy, 2026. Accessed 2026-07-05. [30] Brian Krebs. Hackers used meta’s ai support bot to seize instagram accounts, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-10. [31] Jungjae Lee, Dongjae Lee, Chihun Choi, Youngmin Im, Jaeyoung Wi, Kihong Heo, Sangeun Oh, Sunjae Lee, and Insik Shin. Verisafe agent: Safeguarding mobile gui agent via logic-based action verification. In Pro-ceedings of the 31st Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking , ACM MOBI-COM ’25, page 817–831, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. [32] Evan Li, Tushin Mallick, Evan Rose, William Robert-son, Alina Oprea, and Cristina Nita-Rotaru. ACE: A Security Architecture for LLM-Integrated App Systems, September 2025. Accessed 2026-04-24. [33] Hao Li, Xiaogeng Liu, CHIU Chun, Dianqi Li, Ning Zhang, and Chaowei Xiao. Drift: Dynamic rule-based defense with injection isolation for securing llm agents. In D. Belgrave, C. Zhang, H. Lin, R. Pascanu, P. Koniusz, M. Ghassemi, and N. Chen, editors, Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 38, pages 83262–83290. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. Accessed 2026-05-08. [34] Ben Light, Jean Burgess, and Stefanie Duguay. The walkthrough method: An approach to the study of apps. 

New Media & Society , 20(3):881–900, 2018. [35] Tula Masterman, Sandi Besen, Mason Sawtell, and Alex Chao. The landscape of emerging ai agent architectures for reasoning, planning, and tool calling: A survey, 2024. [36] Erik Meijer. Guardians of the agents. Commun. ACM ,69(1):46–52, December 2025. [37] Luoxi Meng, Henry Feng, Ilia Shumailov, and Earlence Fernandes. cellmate: Sandboxing browser ai agents, 2026. Accessed 2026-05-08. 13 [38] Milad Nasr, Nicholas Carlini, Chawin Sitawarin, Sander V. Schulhoff, Jamie Hayes, Michael Ilie, Juli-ette Pluto, Shuang Song, Harsh Chaudhari, Ilia Shu-mailov, Abhradeep Thakurta, Kai Yuanqing Xiao, An-dreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. The Attacker Moves Second: Stronger Adaptive Attacks Bypass Defenses Against Llm Jailbreaks and Prompt Injections, 2025. Accessed 2026-04-03. [39] OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt, 2022. Accessed 2026-06-09. [40] OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt atlas, 2025. Accessed 2026-06-09. [41] OpenAI. Codex, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [42] OWASP. Owasp top 10 for llm applications 2025, 2024. Accessed 2026-06-09. [43] Nils Palumbo, Sarthak Choudhary, Jihye Choi, Guy Amir, Prasad Chalasani, and Somesh Jha. Formal pol-icy enforcement for real-world agentic systems, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-02. [44] Nils Palumbo, Sarthak Choudhary, Jihye Choi, Prasad Chalasani, and Somesh Jha. Policy Compiler for Secure Agentic Systems, February 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [45] Perplexity. Comet browser, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-09. [46] Traian Rebedea, Razvan Dinu, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Christopher Parisien, and Jonathan Cohen. NeMo guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with programmable rails. In Yansong Feng and Els Lefever, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 431–445, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. [47] J.H. Saltzer and M.D. Schroeder. The protection of information in computer systems. Proceedings of the IEEE , 63(9):1278–1308, 1975. [48] Ranjan Sapkota, Konstantinos I. Roumeliotis, and Manoj Karkee. Ai agents vs. agentic ai: A conceptual taxonomy, applications and challenges. Information Fusion , 126:103599, 2026. [49] Reshabh K. Sharma and Dan Grossman. AC4A: Access Control for Agents, March 2026. Accessed 2026-04-20. [50] Tianneng Shi, Jingxuan He, Zhun Wang, Hongwei Li, Linyu Wu, Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. Progent: Pro-grammable Privilege Control for LLM Agents, August 2025. Accessed 2026-04-21. [51] Richard E. Smith. A contemporary look at saltzer and schroeder’s 1975 design principles. IEEE Security & Privacy , 10(6):20–25, 2012. [52] Robert Stanley, Avi Verma, Lillian Tsai, Konstantinos Kallas, and Sam Kumar. An ai agent execution environ-ment to safeguard user data, 2026. Accessed 2026-07-05. [53] Lillian Tsai and Eugene Bagdasarian. Contextual agent security: A policy for every purpose. In Proceedings of the 2025 Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Sys-tems , HotOS ’25, page 8–17, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. [54] Anthony Vance, David Eargle, Jeffrey L. Jenkins, C. Brock Kirwan, and Bonnie Brinton Anderson. The fog of warnings: How non-essential notifications blur with security warnings. In Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2019) , pages 407– 420, Santa Clara, CA, August 2019. USENIX Associa-tion. [55] Haoyu Wang, Christopher M. Poskitt, and Jun Sun. AgentSpec: Customizable Runtime Enforcement for Safe and Reliable LLM Agents, July 2025. Accessed 2026-04-20. [56] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Jirong Wen. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Sci-ence , 18(6):186345, March 2024. [57] Peiran Wang, Ying Li, and Yuan Tian. Reframing llm agent security as an agent-human interaction problem, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-05. [58] Fangzhou Wu, Ethan Cecchetti, and Chaowei Xiao. System-level defense against indirect prompt injection attacks: An information flow control perspective, 2024. Accessed 2026-05-08. [59] Yuhao Wu, Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi Kohno, Ning Zhang, and Umar Iqbal. IsolateGPT: An Execution Isolation Architecture for LLM-Based Agentic Systems, January 2025. Accessed 2026-04-23. [60] Yuhao Wu, Ke Yang, Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi Kohno, Ning Zhang, and Umar Iqbal. Towards Automat-ing Data Access Permissions in AI Agents, November 2025. Accessed 2026-04-21. [61] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran Wang, Changhao 14 Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shi-han Dou, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, and Tao Gui. The rise and potential of large lan-guage model based agents: A survey, 2023. Accessed 2026-06-09. [62] Zhen Xiang, Linzhi Zheng, Yanjie Li, Junyuan Hong, Qinbin Li, Han Xie, Jiawei Zhang, Zidi Xiong, Chulin Xie, Carl Yang, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. GuardA-gent: Safeguard LLM Agents by a Guard Agent via Knowledge-Enabled Reasoning, May 2025. Accessed 2026-04-22. [63] Yingxuan Yang, Huacan Chai, Yuanyi Song, Siyuan Qi, Muning Wen, Ning Li, Junwei Liao, Haoyi Hu, Jianghao Lin, Gaowei Chang, Weiwen Liu, Ying Wen, Yong Yu, and Weinan Zhang. A survey of ai agent protocols, 2025. Accessed 2026-06-09. [64] Tingwei Zhang, Harold Triedman, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Deep-research agents can be poisoned via user-generated content, 2026. Accessed 2026-07-06. [65] Timothy Zhou, Loris D’Antoni, and Nadia Polikarpova. Language-based agent control, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-02. [66] Jinhao Zhu, Kevin Tseng, Gil Vernik, Xiao Huang, Shishir G. Patil, Vivian Fang, and Raluca Ada Popa. Miniscope: A least privilege framework for authorizing tool calling agents, 2025. Accessed 2026-05-08. 

# A Ethical Considerations 

The relevant ethical stakeholders for this work include the users and developers of agentic AI systems, as well as re-searchers in AI agents and agentic security. We believe our work to be of benefit to all of these stakeholders: Our insights may help developers and distributors identify areas for im-provement in their products, which would in turn help users gain improved privacy, security, and autonomy when using AI agents. Researchers, meanwhile, may benefit by using our review to identify important and promising areas of future work. Our publication of Claude’s implicit auto-review behavior (§4.3.2) reveals a permissions gap that could theoretically be exploited to harm Claude’s users, e.g., through prompt injection attacks. We believe the added risk to users due to our work is minimal, considering that all agents are already well known to be vulnerable to prompt injection. We disclosed Claude’s implicit auto-review behavior to Anthropic on July 2, 2026, and are currently awaiting their response. Generative AI tools were used solely as subjects of evalua-tion, as described in Section 3, toward answering the principal research questions of this work. No generative AI was used otherwise. The authors completed all ideation and planning, literature searches, paper reviewing, and writing without AI assistance. 15