Title: Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.22953v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 00:18:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI 

## Sourena Khanzadeh 1,2,∗ Daniel Platnick 2 Marjan Alirezaie 1,2 Hossein Rahnama 1,2,3

> 1

Toronto Metropolitan University 2Flybits Labs 3MIT Media Lab Toronto, Canada sourena.khanzadeh@torontomu.ca daniel.platnick@flybits.com malirezaie@torontomu.ca rahanma@mit.edu 

## Abstract 

Modern AI systems bring societal risks such as mass surveillance, ex-treme concentrations of power, and loss of user autonomy—calling into question a model where third-parties collect and control mas-sive amounts of user data. Users require a sovereign system to securely own, govern, and disclose their context while remaining compliant across regulated domains with strict provenance, inter-pretability, and policy adherence. Perspective-aware AI approaches this by transforming a user’s aggregated personal data into a struc-tured identity model called a Chronicle : a temporal knowledge graph that represents and grows with the user. Chronicles support the secure disclosure of context across federated networks. A Chronicle holder may expose a queryable, authorized view that a third-party agent may consult without centralizing anyone’s data. This paper explores the problem of minimum-necessary disclosure across do-main boundaries: when a requester’s agent queries a Chronicle, how can the system constrain its response to release only what the requester’s relationship, stated purpose, and specific task require? We propose Provenance Preserving Chronicles (PPC), a feder-ated protocol that compiles each holder’s Chronicle into a compact 

authorized evidence subgraph governed by one rule: share no more than the request requires . Holders keep local sovereignty; an access controller projects relationship-aware views over domain-expert on-tologies; and a two-phase flow returns provenance-linked text first, releasing raw artifacts only after explicit holder approval. We frame the problem, map gaps in blockchain, P2P, and holder-sovereign designs, define the core constructs, and sketch the protocol with an explicit threat model. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Security and privacy → Software and application security ;

• Social and professional topics → Privacy policies ; Digital rights management . 

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> AISec ’26, The Hague, Netherlands
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

## Keywords 

User sovereignty, digital identity, selective disclosure, data gover-nance, federated networks, perspective-aware AI 

ACM Reference Format: 

Sourena Khanzadeh 1,2,∗ Daniel Platnick 2 Marjan Alirezaie 1,2 Hossein Rahnama 1,2,3. 2026. Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI. In Proceedings of 19th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

## 1 Introduction 

Third-party platforms aggregate and control ever-larger troves of personal data, leaving users owning less and less of their dig-ital identity [ 4 ]. Repeated surveillance disclosures and security breaches have increased demand for architectures in which users own and control what they share [ 11 , 14 ], preserving sovereignty over their data. Bitcoin demonstrated that trusted, auditable coordi-nation is possible without a central authority, using a decentralized network of peers accompanied by a public ledger [ 28 ] creating a trusted environment for entities making transactions. MedRec applied that pattern to healthcare records: a decentralized personal data management system that turns a blockchain into an automated access-control manager—one that does not require trust in a third party—whose transactions carry instructions to store, query, and share data rather than strictly financial transfers [ 5]. The direction is right; the substrate is incomplete for autonomous agent-native identity exchange. The premise that individuals should hold and selectively share portable, machine-verifiable identity context is not unique to any one group: it underpins self-sovereign identity [ 3], Solid personal data pods [ 8], and the W3C Decentralized Identifier and Verifiable Credential stack [ 36 , 37 ]. Perspective-Aware AI (PAi) advances one such form, treating identity as something you can share, not something a platform owns [2]. PAi builds this identity from the bottom up. A user opts in by connecting their data channels (e.g., third-party apps) and con-tributing their data artifacts such as images, audio, text. Artifacts are then mapped to situation-level graphs describing distinct sit-uations the user has experienced. For provenance, data artifacts are stored with pointers to their corresponding situation graphs. Compiling the user’s full set of situation graphs across time yields a Chronicle [ 2 ]: a longitudinal knowledge graph of how a person or organization shows up across contexts. Chronicles already power agents in deployed settings such as social simulation and extended arXiv:2607.22953v1 [cs.AI] 24 Jul 2026 AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands Khanzadeh et al. 

reality [ 31 , 32 ]. The next step is to make Chronicles securely share-able as a user-owned, digital identity that a third-party agent may temporarily query as a source of personal context—without copying or owning the underlying identity data. On a federated network, this lets one node’s agent permissibly consult another user’s Chronicle without centralizing anyone’s data or routing disclosure through a global ledger. That portability breaks down at the disclosure boundary. This paper addresses the problem of selective disclosure for PAi Chronicles: given a requester, a relationship, a purpose, and a query, how can a holder release the smallest authorized subgraph sufficient to answer the request? In a doctor–patient relationship, each side holds a med-ical Chronicle—conditions, treatments, outcomes—and agents on both sides could exchange clinical perspective to inform care. A cardiologist checking drug interactions does not need psychiatric session notes; an insurance auditor does not need the same slice as a treating physician. To minimize disclosure in the controlled ex-change of identity context between two users, each release should be scoped to the requester’s relationship , the stated purpose , and the information need —not shipped as an all-or-nothing export. The problem is not how to retrieve from a graph; it is how to share Chronicle evidence under minimum-necessary constraints by a dy-namic access control when holders, policies, and domains differ. To our knowledge, no existing framework jointly answers three questions at exchange time: why does the requester need this data, 

what relationship do they hold to the subject, and what is the small-est authorized fragment sufficient for the task? Blockchain access managers log who may touch which records but do not compile predicate-labeled, temporally ordered evidence subgraphs per re-quest; holder-sovereign platforms such as Solid [ 8 ] and P2P overlays distribute custody without exchange-time minimization (§3). Agent-mediated information exchange creates a structural ten-sion between useful personalization and the holder’s control over sensitive records. We propose Provenance Preserving Chroni-cles (PPC), a federated protocol for selective, auditable disclosure across autonomous agents. PPC represents a holder’s records as lo-cally governed Chronicles and uses domain ontologies, relationship-aware policies, and dynamic subgraph projection to construct request-specific evidence views. Its two-phase interaction model first pro-duces provenance-linked textual responses, while access to under-lying artifacts requires a separate, explicit authorization step. The design distinguishes protocol-level access-control guarantees from risks introduced after disclosure, including downstream inference, prompt injection, and the irreversible retention of information by LLM-based consumers. We formalize the system’s threat model and illustrate its operation through medical and litigation scenarios. These case studies show how a common protocol can support mul-tiple regulated domains by varying ontologies, participant roles, and disclosure policies without centralizing the underlying data. 

## 2 Background 

We build on two PAi constructs: Situation Graphs (§2.1) and Chron-icles (§2.2). 

## 2.1 Situation Graphs 

A Situation Graph (SG) snapshots one situated moment as a predicate-labeled knowledge graph. By predicate-labeled we mean every edge carries a semantic type—a predicate from a domain ontology—so the graph encodes typed relations rather than untyped connectivity, and policy and retrieval reason over these types. A central situ-ation node anchors context—participant, location, time, weather, emotion, activity, and related entities. Raw identity artifacts be-come machine-readable structure that can be sequenced over time (Figure 1). 

## 2.2 Chronicles 

At time 𝑡 𝑖 , a Situation Graph is a knowledge graph 

𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 = (𝑉 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐸 𝑡 𝑖 ),

where 𝑉 𝑡 𝑖 holds entities, attributes, and contextual objects, and 

𝐸 𝑡 𝑖 ⊆ 𝑉 𝑡 𝑖 × P × 𝑉 𝑡 𝑖 

holds directed predicate-labeled edges. Each edge is a semantic triple (𝑠, 𝑝, 𝑜 )—subject, predicate 𝑝 ∈ P , object. A distinguished situ-ation node 𝑠 𝑡 𝑖 anchors the moment, but edges need not radiate from it: contextual entities also link directly (e.g., (lamotrigine , hasDosage ,

200 mg )), so 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 is a general typed graph, not a star centered on 𝑠 𝑡 𝑖 .A Chronicle for entity 𝑢 is the time-ordered sequence of those snapshots: 

C𝑢 = ⟨𝐺 𝑡 1 , 𝐺 𝑡 2 , . . . , 𝐺 𝑡 𝑛 ⟩,

with 𝑡 1 < 𝑡 2 < · · · < 𝑡 𝑛 . Each 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 is how 𝑢 showed up at time 𝑡 𝑖 ;together they track context, behavior, preferences, and perspective as they evolve. The sequence is the backbone, but a Chronicle is more than a list of snapshots: each 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 carries temporal anchors (event and ingestion timestamps) and provenance linking its triples to the source artifacts they were extracted from; cross-situation links join co-referent entities across snapshots; and the consolidated view 

𝐺 C𝑢 (below), plus any inferred patterns (habits, trends) mined over it, are part of the Chronicle too. These are first-class, though the formalism foregrounds the sequence and its consolidation. For retrieval and compilation, we also use a consolidated view: 

𝐺 C𝑢 =

> 𝑛

Ê

> 𝑖 =1

𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 ,

where É is not a plain set union but a provenance-preserving merge with entity alignment : co-referent nodes are unified across snap-shots, every node and edge keeps its time index 𝑡 𝑖 and a provenance pointer to its source Situation Graph and artifact, and duplicate triples are coalesced with their temporal annotations preserved. The result 𝐺 C𝑢 = (𝑉 C𝑢 , 𝐸 C𝑢 ) is a single temporal, provenance-annotated identity graph—not a bag of disconnected snapshots (Figure 1).   

> 𝐺 𝑡 1𝐺 𝑡 2
> · · ·
> 𝐺 𝑡 𝑛
> Longitudinal Chronicle
> C
> 𝑡 1consolidate

Figure 1: A Chronicle stacks Situation Graph snapshots in time. Each 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 is a predicate-labeled graph for one situated moment; consolidation yields the longitudinal Chronicle C.Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands 

## 3 Related Work 

This section discusses the existing literature, approaches, and gaps surrounding user-sovereign identity exchange and personal context management. 

## 3.1 Blockchain and Confidential Smart-Contract Networks 

Blockchain systems enforce decentralized trust through replicated global state and consensus. MedRec [ 5] applied this to medical-record access management: providers log permissions on-chain while patients retain copies locally. Secret Network [ 24 , 35 ] and re-lated Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)-assisted platforms (Oa-sis, Phala) push further with programmable privacy —CosmWasm contracts executing inside SGX enclaves so contract inputs, outputs, and state stay encrypted in use [ 43 ]. Li et al. [ 24 ] systematize these designs as layer-one and layer-two confidential smart-contract stacks. For Chronicle disclosure, the blockchain model is a poor fit. Val-idators replicate ledger state across the network; disclosure becomes 

contract execution over globally agreed state, not holder-local com-pilation of a minimum authorized subgraph. Relationship, purpose, and predicate-level policy must be encoded ad hoc per application; there is no native notion of Situation-Graph structure or exchange-time minimization across sovereign holders. Security analyses rein-force the mismatch: Jean-Louis et al. [ 20 ] show practical privacy breaks on Secret Network from storage access patterns and state replay; Wilde et al. [ 42 ] document forking and cloning attacks when TEE state is not tightly coupled to consensus. Chronicle exchange needs least-authority release between known peers [ 41 ], not global replication with gas-metered contract calls. 

## 3.2 Federated Holder-Sovereign Platforms 

A second thread keeps data at the edge. Solid [ 8, 25 ] stores user arti-facts in personal pods with WebID-based access control. Verifiable-credentials infrastructure [ 17 , 36 ] binds identity, role, and institu-tional affiliation for cross-domain trust without a central issuer. These models align with holder sovereignty: each party controls what it stores and who may read it. What they lack is Chronicle semantics—temporal stacks of predicate-labeled Situation Graphs— and an exchange-time compiler that returns a compact authorized evidence subgraph for a stated relationship and purpose. 

## 3.3 Peer-to-Peer Overlays and Decentralized Storage 

Peer-to-peer overlays distribute content without a global ledger [ 7,27 , 38 , 40 ]. libp2p [ 33 ] modularizes discovery, transport, and multi-plexing for application-level federations. Secure Scuttlebutt [ 39 ] and similar gossip protocols propagate signed feeds among mutually trusted peers. OceanStore [ 23 ] and IPFS-style content addressing provide durable, location-independent retrieval across untrusted nodes. These systems solve where bits live and how they are found ; they do not decide which Chronicle fragment a requester may receive .A P2P overlay can carry compiled evidence once policy has been applied, but the overlay itself does not enforce purpose limitation, relationship-scoped predicate access, or minimum-sufficient sub-graph compilation at the holder boundary. 

## 3.4 Semantic Web Access Control and Policy Languages 

Controlled access to Resource Description Framework (RDF) has been studied for two decades [ 22 ]. Named graphs attach identity, provenance, and trust metadata to triple sets, a natural unit for scoping disclosure [ 10 ]; SPARQL 1.1 [ 18 ] expresses filtered views (CONSTRUCT /DESCRIBE , graph patterns, FROM NAMED ); and ontology-and context-based access control attaches policy to semantic types and request context [ 12 , 21 ]. Graph-native policy languages such as ODRL [ 19 ] and Web Access Control (WAC in Solid [ 8 ]) govern who may operate on which resource, over triples modeled per RDF 1.1 [ 13 ]. This is the right substrate, and PPC builds on it— predicate types come from a domain-expert ontology (§4.1), and 

A can be realized as an ontology-typed, context-aware policy in this tradition. What none provides is exchange-time minimization : a SPARQL view or WAC rule returns the triples a requester is allowed 

to see or that a query matches , but does not compile a compact, minimum-necessary evidence subgraph (§4.2) for a relationship and purpose, prune authorized-but-unnecessary structure, reason over 

temporal Situation-Graph ordering, or coordinate a provenance-first release across federated holders. PPC is the compilation layer on this substrate, not a replacement. 

## 3.5 Purpose-, Relationship-, and Norm-Based Access Control 

The two levers PPC pulls at exchange time have long lineages in access control. Hippocratic databases made purpose a first-class element of a DBMS: data is tagged with allowed purposes at col-lection and queries are filtered against them [ 1], and Byun and Li formalized purpose-based access control with purpose hierarchies over relational data [ 9 ]. Relationship-based access control (ReBAC) makes the requester–subject relationship, rather than roles or at-tributes, the primitive that policy reasons over [ 15 ]. Contextual integrity frames both as instances of a broader norm: informa-tion flows are appropriate when they conform to context-relative transmission principles binding sender, recipient, relationship, and purpose [ 29 ]. Recent work carries these norms to LLM-based agents: AirGapAgent restricts a conversational agent’s working context to task-necessary user data to resist adversarial extraction [ 6], and Ghalebikesabi et al. operationalize contextual integrity as an information-flow judgment inside assistants [ 16 ]. These systems act at prompt or inference time over flat attribute sets. PPC can be read as the compile-time counterpart for structured identity: the transmission principle (relationship 𝑟 , purpose 𝑝 ) is evaluated by A before anything crosses the holder boundary, over temporal, predicate-labeled Chronicle structure, and “task-necessary” is en-forced as a subgraph-minimization objective (§4.2) rather than a prompt-time heuristic. AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands Khanzadeh et al. 

## 3.6 Positioning: The Closest Alternative Is a Pod Plus a Policy Engine 

We want to be fair about what a ledger is and is not for here. MedRec-style systems use the blockchain for permissions and tamper-evident audit , not for moving records [ 5 ]; no serious design routes clinical payloads or per-disclosure decisions through global consensus. So “don’t run disclosure over consensus” is not the real disagreement. A ledger genuinely buys tamper-evident logging, and PPC could adopt one for exactly that purpose; what a ledger does not pro-vide is any notion of Chronicle structure or minimum-necessary release, and confidential-contract variants (Secret Network) add validator/TEE trust and platform-upgrade and forking risk [ 20 , 42 ]without addressing that gap. The honest comparison is therefore against the strongest edge-native stack one could assemble today: Solid pods + Verifiable Credentials + a policy engine [8 , 25 , 36 ]. That combination al-ready gets three things right—data stays holder-local, exchange is ledger-free, and a verifiable presentation can bind a requester’s identity, role, and purpose to an access decision. If the goal were coarse-grained document access control, it would largely suffice. Two things are still missing, and they are what PPC contributes. First, Chronicle semantics : pods and policy engines gate documents or RDF resources, not temporal stacks of predicate-labeled Situa-tion Graphs where the semantic type of each edge and its position in time are what policy must reason over. Second, exchange-time minimization : a policy engine returns the resources a requester is al-lowed to see, whereas PPC compiles a compact authorized subgraph sufficient for the specific request (𝑆 ∗)—filtering by relationship and purpose, then pruning toward a minimum connected evidence set, then shipping provenance-linked text before any raw artifact. GDPR Art. 5(1)(c) data minimisation and HIPAA’s minimum-necessary standard (45 C.F.R. §164.502(b)) ask for exactly this per-request ’smallest sufficient’ release [ 30 , 34 ], and it is not something an al-low/deny policy layer expresses. PPC is thus complementary to pods and credentials, not a replacement: it is the compilation step that turns “what may this requester access?” into “what is the least this request needs?” Synthesizing these paradigms reveals a distinct architectural gap: temporal, holder-sovereign Chronicles plus exchange-time, relationship- and purpose-aware evidence compilation across feder-ated peers. No existing layer supplies that compiler—a ledger adds tamper-evident audit, a pod-plus-credential stack adds sovereign storage and access decisions, but neither reasons over Situation-Graph structure or minimizes what a specific request needs. Chron-icles differ from static stores in three ways—they are temporal (or-dered Situation Graphs), holder-sovereign (evidence based artifact release is opt-in per holder), and predicate-rich (each edge carries semantic type that policy must respect). Table 1 maps where ex-isting network systems land on holder sovereignty, ledger-free exchange, and Chronicle-aware disclosure; P2P overlays and confi-dential chains are transport or trust substrates at best, not solutions to minimum-necessary release. 

## 4 Framework Design 

The core idea is simple: compile a compact authorized evidence subgraph sufficient for the request, subject to policy—as small as 

Table 1: Capability comparison for federated Chronicle dis-closure. PPC: Provenance Preserving Chronicles (our pro-posal). Hold.Sov.: primary Chronicle custody stays with the holder, not validators or a shared ledger; Ledger-free: disclo-sure does not require global blockchain consensus; Chronicle: temporal, predicate-labeled Situation Graph semantics; Pur-pose: exchange gated by stated request purpose; Relation: access scoped to requester–holder relationship; Min.Sub.: re-leases a minimum sufficient subgraph per request. ✓ = sup-ported; ∼ = partial; × = absent.                                     

> System Hold.Sov. Ledger-free Chronicle Purpose Relation Min.Sub.
> Solid ✓✓×∼∼×
> MedRec ∼××∼∼×
> Secret Network ××××××
> IPFS / libp2p ∼✓××××
> Secure Scuttlebutt ✓✓××××
> PPC ✓✓✓✓✓✓

policy and the request allow, formalized as a minimization objective in §4.2. One principle governs the design— share no more than the request requires —and we keep access-control guarantees separate from what a requester’s agent might infer from the release. Figure 2 illustrates the holistic architecture of our framework through a top-down hierarchical view: starting from the overarching federated peer network, zooming into the local access controller during a doctor–patient interaction, and exposing the structural anatomy of the longitudinal Chronicle—from fine-grained medical Situation Graphs down to provenance-backed artifact references 

## 4.1 The Authorization Function 

Given Chronicle C𝑢 for holder 𝑢 , the authorization function 

A : Rel × Purp ×  Ð 𝑖 𝑉 𝑡 𝑖 ∪ Ð𝑖 𝐸 𝑡 𝑖 

 → { permit , deny }

takes a requester–holder relationship 𝑟 ∈ Rel (e.g., treating physi-cian, insurance auditor), a stated purpose 𝑝 ∈ Purp , and one node or edge from the Chronicle, and decides: for this requester, under this purpose, is it allowed out? Evaluation runs locally at the holder against policies typed by a domain-expert ontology . We write Rel 

rather than a requester-identity space to keep A distinct from the request 𝑄 introduced below—authorization depends on both the requester’s relationship to the holder and the operational requirements of the specific query .Two regulatory principles drive the function: (1) Purpose limitation: data collected for purpose 𝑝 1 may only be disclosed for purpose 𝑝 2 if 𝑝 2 is compatible with 𝑝 1 under the applicable legal framework (GDPR Article 5(1)(b) [ 34 ], HIPAA Treatment-Payment-Operations [30]). (2) Relationship-based access: the requester’s relationship to the holder—treating physician, insurance auditor, opposing counsel, co-researcher—maps to a user type that gates which predicate categories are in bounds. In PAI terms, the relationship is itself a perspective on the contextual management exchange. Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands 

REQUESTER 

Doctor 

B1: recent cardiac 

B2: current meds 

B3: HbA1c trend 

prompt queue (FIFO, batched) 

> secure channel  ⊠

ACCESS CONTROLLER 

grants access 

when ready 

Local LLM 

generates output 

Agent 

references chronicle 

enqueue (1) dequeue · (2) request (3) grant 

(4) query 

(5) text + refs [𝐴 𝑖 ]

(6) iff ask source [𝐴 𝑖 ]

1 · Access & interaction protocol provenance-preserving query over a locally held chronicle 

Federation A

Federation B

Federation C

Federation D

node 1 

node 2 

node 3 

node 4 

node 5 

node 6 

node 7 

node 8 

node 9 

node 10 

node 11 

node 12 

Federated overview Federated overview 

Federated Peer-to-Peer Hybrid Network 

𝑃 1

S1

𝐴 1

𝑡 1

𝑃 1

S2

𝐴 2

𝑡 2

𝑃 1

S3

𝐴 3

𝑡 3

𝑃 1

S4

𝐴 4

𝑡 4

𝑃 1

S5

𝐴 5

𝑡 5

pairs with 

2 · Chronicle 𝐺 C𝑢 = É𝑛 𝑖 =1 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 the main participant bridges situation graphs; the temporal spine orders them in time 

Agent references the chronicle ⟨𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 ⟩

Diabetes follow-up 

Brian Liang 

attends 

HbA1c 8.2% 

> lab result

Metformin 

> medication

Fatigue 

> symptom

Dr. Chen clinician 

BP 138/86 

> vital sign

Type 2 diabetes 

> diagnosis

Clinic 

> location

Toronto 

> city

Morning 

> time of day

3 · Inside a medical situation graph 𝐺 𝑡 𝑖 = S𝑖 

expand clinical S𝑖 

reference [𝐴 𝑖 ] resolves to 

𝐴 

Raw artifact 

self-contained payload (file / data blob) 

no provenance graph 

S1

𝐴 1

𝑡 1

S2

𝐴 2

𝑡 2

S3

𝐴 3

𝑡 3

Chronicle — ordered ⟨ S 𝑖 , 𝐴 𝑖 ⟩, carries provenance 

raw provenance 

4 · What a reference resolves to a chronicle embeds artifacts 

(8) share / resolve [𝐴 𝑖 ]

Legend 

main participant 𝑃 1

temporal node 𝑡 𝑖 

knowledge node situation graph S𝑖 

artifact 𝐴 𝑖 

participant bridge temporal edge (timeline) knowledge edge - - - situation–time anchor 

→ S 𝑖 →𝐴 𝑖 pairing 

Figure 2: Federated Chronicle disclosure architecture. A requester sends batched requests over a secure channel to an access controller, which gates a local agent and Chronicle-aware services. Holders keep temporally ordered Situation Graphs linking situations to embedded artifacts and provenance. Federated groups exchange across local networks without centralizing personal data. Responses cite provenance-carrying Chronicle entries—not isolated raw artifacts—so disclosure stays traceable and context-aware. AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands Khanzadeh et al. 

Purpose plus relationship yields a fine-grained authorization context that is query-independent but requester-dependent . A treat-ing cardiologist asking about drug interactions can reach current prescriptions and relevant diagnoses—not psychiatric session notes or billing records. An insurance auditor with a different relationship and purpose gets a different authorized slice of the same Chronicle. 

## 4.2 The Authorized Evidence Subgraph 

Given request 𝑄 , authorization context (𝑟, 𝑝 ), and Chronicle C𝑢 =

⟨𝐺 𝑡 1 , . . . , 𝐺 𝑡 𝑛 ⟩, a candidate evidence subgraph is a pair 𝑆 = (𝑉 𝑆 , 𝐸 𝑆 )

with 𝑉 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 C𝑢 and 𝐸 𝑆 ⊆ 𝐸 C𝑢 whose endpoints lie in 𝑉 𝑆 , and size 

|𝑆 | = |𝑉 𝑆 | + | 𝐸 𝑆 |. The authorized evidence subgraph 𝑆 ∗ solves the following, where the predicate Sufficient (𝑆, 𝑄 ) is defined in §4.3: 

min  

> 𝑆

|𝑆 | s.t. 



𝑆 ⊆ 𝐺 C𝑢 (i) 

∀ 𝑥 ∈𝑉 𝑆 ∪ 𝐸 𝑆 : A ( 𝑟, 𝑝, 𝑥 ) = permit (ii) 

Sufficient (𝑆, 𝑄 ) (iii) (1) Constraint (i): 𝑆 is drawn from the consolidated longitudinal Chronicle. Constraint (ii): every element—each node in 𝑉 𝑆 and 

each edge in 𝐸 𝑆 —passes A, which is defined over nodes and edges alike (§4.1). Eq. (1) states the minimization objective exactly; the protocol (§6) approximates it with a tractable solver rather than certifying a globally optimal 𝑆 ∗, so we describe the compiled output as compact (minimum under the chosen objective) rather than provably smallest. We define sufficiency in two tiers; only the first is an operational guarantee. The structural baseline holds for any consumer: 𝑆 must cover every information need with connected predicate-typed paths and satisfy predicate-type completeness. This tier is local, decidable, and is the contract the protocol enforces. The second tier is an aspirational distributional refinement—an evaluation target, not a shipped mechanism. When the consumer is an LLM-based agent M and a holder can materialize its local au-thorized subgraph C𝑎 = (𝑉 𝑎 , 𝐸 𝑎 ), with 𝑉 𝑎 = {𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 C𝑢 : A ( 𝑟, 𝑝, 𝑣 ) =

permit } and 𝐸 𝑎 the permitted edges among 𝑉 𝑎 (not a bare edge set), one would like 𝑃 M (· | 𝑆, 𝑄 ) to lie within divergence 𝜀 (measure 𝐷 ,e.g. KL) of 𝑃 M (· | C 𝑎 , 𝑄 ), over semantic equivalence classes of answer strings rather than raw tokens. Two caveats make this a research target: (i) in a federated deployment C𝑎 is never materialized cen-trally, so the check is only definable at a single holder over its fragment; and (ii) estimating 𝑃 M over answer-equivalence classes is itself unsolved. The distributional tier therefore only refines the structural bar; when it cannot be computed, Algorithm 1 falls back to the structural baseline with no weaker guarantee. 

## 4.3 Sufficiency Check 

Request planning. A planner maps 𝑄 to schema-level informa-tion needs I ( 𝑄 ) = {𝑖 1, . . . , 𝑖 𝑘 }, each carrying a path template 𝑇 𝑗 =

⟨𝜏 1, . . . , 𝜏 𝑚 ⟩ of predicate types from the ontology (e.g. ⟨prescribed ,

hasDosage ⟩). Planning may be symbolic (ontology-guided templates from a controlled vocabulary), LLM-based (templates proposed from natural-language 𝑄 ), or hybrid (LLM proposals validated against ontology-admissible templates; our default). Framework soundness is conditional on this step: sufficiency, minimization, and autho-rization are all defined relative to I ( 𝑄 ), so a planner that drops a genuine need yields an 𝑆 ∗ that is compact but under-informative (§5.1); auditing or recovering I ( 𝑄 ) is itself an open problem. 

Coverage predicates. Let ⊑ denote ontology subsumption on predicate types. PathCov (𝑆, 𝑖 𝑗 ) holds iff 𝑆 contains a directed walk 

𝑣 0

> 𝑒 1

−→ · · · 𝑒 𝑚 

−−→ 𝑣 𝑚 whose edge types match 𝑇 𝑗 up to subsumption (type (𝑒 𝑙 ) ⊑ 𝜏 𝑙 )—so diagnosis is satisfied by a cardiacDiagnosis edge but not conversely (subsumption-aware, not exact-label). 

PredComplete (𝑆, 𝑄 ) holds when, for every 

𝜏 ∈ Π(𝑄 ) =

Ø

> 𝑗

predicateTypes (𝑇 𝑗 )

, the edges on covering walks subsuming to 𝜏 meet the count 

req (𝜏, 𝑄 ) (e.g. one hasDosage per prescription). Paths (𝑆, I) collects nodes and edges in any PathCov witness. Finally ProvComplete (𝑆 )

holds when every element of 𝑆 carries a provenance pointer to the Situation Graph (and artifact, where applicable) it came from, so each released path is traceable. 

Algorithm 1 is a validator , not a search: it decides whether a 

given candidate 𝑆 satisfies constraint (iii), and does not enumerate subgraphs, compare alternatives, or certify minimality. That search is the compiler’s job (§6), which calls the validator as a subroutine. 

Algorithm 1 Sufficiency validator for a candidate evidence sub-graph (decides constraint (iii); does not search or minimize) 

Require: Candidate subgraph 𝑆 = (𝑉 𝑆 , 𝐸 𝑆 ); request 𝑄 ; needs I ( 𝑄 ) with templates {𝑇 𝑗 }; auth. context (𝑟, 𝑝 ); threshold 𝜀 ; optional consumer model M; local authorized view C𝑎 

Ensure: true iff 𝑆 is sufficient for 𝑄  

> 1:

for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 𝑆 ∪ 𝐸 𝑆 do ⊲ nodes and edges  

> 2:

if A ( 𝑟, 𝑝, 𝑥 ) = deny then  

> 3:

return false (auth. leak)  

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

for all 𝑖 𝑗 ∈ I ( 𝑄 ) do  

> 7:

if ¬PathCov (𝑆, 𝑖 𝑗 ) then  

> 8:

return false (unmet path template)  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

if ¬PredComplete (𝑆, 𝑄 ) then  

> 12:

return false (missing predicate type)  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

if Paths (𝑆, I ) is disconnected in 𝑆 then  

> 15:

return false (broken linkage)  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

if ¬ProvComplete (𝑆 ) then  

> 18:

return false (untraceable evidence)  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

struct ← true  

> 21:

if M is LLM-based and C𝑎 is available locally then  

> 22:

𝜋 𝑆 ← 𝑃 M (· | serialize (𝑆 ), 𝑄 ) 

> 23:

𝜋 𝑎 ← 𝑃 M (· | serialize ( C 𝑎 ), 𝑄 ) 

> 24:

return struct ∧  𝐷 (𝜋 𝑆 ∥ 𝜋 𝑎 ) ≤ 𝜀  (structural + distributional)  

> 25:

else  

> 26:

return struct (structural baseline)  

> 27:

end if 

Constraint (iii) in Eq. (1) holds when Algorithm 1 returns true .The first loop rejects any element—node or edge—failing A; the next Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands 

four checks enforce the mandatory structural baseline —path cover-age, predicate-type completeness, connectivity, and provenance— for any consumer. When an LLM and local C𝑎 are available, it adds 

a distributional refinement on top; otherwise it returns the struc-tural result alone. The validator never selects among candidates: the compiler (§6) drives the search and invokes it to accept or reject each 𝑆 .Holders run it locally on fragment 𝑆 𝑖 against I𝑖 ⊆ I ( 𝑄 ) during pruning (§6); the coordinator accepts 𝑆 ∗ = Ð𝑖 𝑆 𝑖 only when Ð𝑖 I𝑖 =

I ( 𝑄 ) and each holder reports sufficiency on its I𝑖 . Since a path template can span holders, it re-runs the algorithm once on the assembled 𝑆 ∗ against the full I ( 𝑄 ), so cross-holder connectivity is checked, not assumed. 

## 5 Domain Instantiation 

The same protocol plugs into different regulated domains by swap-ping three knobs: the domain-expert ontology, the user-type taxon-omy, and the disclosure policy. The medical case below instantiates all three and traces the protocol from request to compiled 𝑆 ∗.

## 5.1 Medical Domain 

Consider patient Alice (holder 𝑢 ), whose Chronicle spans frag-ments at multiple hospitals. Dr. Chen, a treating cardiologist at Hospital A, sends an agent request to assess drug-interaction risk be-fore adjusting therapy. The medical ontology types every predicate-labeled edge into categories such as prescription , allergy , diagno-sis (with subcategories cardiac and psychiatric ), session_note , and 

billing . Dr. Chen maps to user type treating_specialist ; the stated purpose is drug_interaction_assessment .Request planning decomposes the natural-language ask—“Do Alice’s current medications pose interaction risk?”—into informa-tion needs I ( 𝑄 ) = {𝑖 1, 𝑖 2 }. Need 𝑖 1 requires current prescription chains (path template 𝑇 1 = ⟨prescribed , hasDosage ⟩); need 𝑖 2 re-quires known allergies ( 𝑇 2 = ⟨hasAllergy ⟩). These templates drive both relevance retrieval and the structural sufficiency checks in Algorithm 1. Table 2 summarizes the end-to-end compilation over Alice’s Hospital A fragment 𝐺 HospA . The policy block (R1–R6) is what the access controller evaluates: R1 activates policy evaluation for Dr. Chen’s relationship and purpose; R2–R3 deny entire predicate categories irrelevant to clinical assessment (billing, psychotherapy notes); R4 blocks psychiatric diagnoses even though other diag-noses are in scope; R5–R6 permit the prescription, allergy, and cardiac-diagnosis edges that a treating specialist may see under this purpose. Each triple in the Chronicle fragment row is tagged with its ontology category and the outcome of A—three edges fail (MDD diagnosis, psychiatric session note, billing claim) before any minimization runs. The compilation steps mirror Phase 1 of §6. Step (a) applies the authorization filter, yielding authorized view C𝑎, HospA with seven of ten edges. Step (b) retrieves edges matching 𝑖 1 and 𝑖 2. Step (c) verifies structural sufficiency: two full ⟨prescribed , hasDosage ⟩ walks (one per drug), one ⟨hasAllergy ⟩ walk, and predicate-type completeness on Π(𝑄 ). Step (d) prunes authorized but unnecessary evidence: the cardiac AFib diagnosis is permitted under R6 but not matched by any path template in I ( 𝑄 ), so a purely structural minimizer drops it, keeping situation node 𝑠 Jun24 only as the minimal provenance anchor. 

Minimality can fight utility. That last step is where the posi-tion gets uncomfortable, and we surface it rather than hide it in the pruner. Dropping the AFib diagnosis is only “minimal” rela-tive to a literal reading of the request. A cardiologist assessing an amiodarone/warfarin interaction may reasonably want the indi-cation —AFib is precisely why amiodarone was prescribed and it shifts anticoagulation reasoning—so the edge that minimization discards can be clinically load-bearing. This exposes a real tension: aggressive minimization optimizes for disclosure safety but can strip context a competent consumer needs, and the “smallest suffi-cient” set is only as good as the information-need decomposition 

I ( 𝑄 ) that defines sufficiency. We do not claim to resolve it. It points to two design choices a full system must make explicit—whether request planning should expand I ( 𝑄 ) to include diagnostic indica-tions for retrieved medications, and whether sufficiency should be judged against task outcome (§4.2) rather than path coverage alone— and it is why the minimization target itself is an open question, not a settled default. 

Four notions of sufficiency. This tension is a gap between levels 

of sufficiency the formalism (§4.2) keeps distinct. Structural suffi-ciency —path coverage, predicate-type completeness, connectivity, provenance (Algorithm 1)—is the only tier the protocol guarantees. 

Task sufficiency asks whether 𝑆 ∗ lets the consumer complete its task; clinical/legal sufficiency adds domain-competence and fairness norms (the AFib indication , or discovery’s negotiation thread); and 

LLM-answer sufficiency is the distributional tier—the consumer’s answer distribution over 𝑆 ∗ tracking that over the full authorized view C𝑎 . The AFib case is structurally sufficient yet clinically in-sufficient: it passes Algorithm 1 but omits load-bearing context. Structural sufficiency lower-bounds the others without implying them; closing that gap is the open question above. The resulting 𝑆 ∗ under the structural policy contains six triples— two medication chains plus one allergy edge, linked through 𝑠 Jun24 .Psychiatric and billing data never cross the holder boundary. Phase 1 delivers a grounded interaction-risk summary with provenance references; if Dr. Chen later needs the underlying lab image, session artifact, or the AFib indication flagged above, Phase 2 requires Alice’s explicit approval per provenance ID. 

## 5.2 Litigation Domain 

The same three knobs re-target the protocol to discovery. Opposing counsel (user type opposing_counsel , purpose discovery ) requests evidence from a corporation’s Chronicle about a specific contract. The litigation ontology types edges as contract_term , communication ,

internal_memo , financial_record , and privileged (attorney–client). Request planning decomposes “communications concerning Con-tract X in the discovery window” into needs I ( 𝑄 ) = {𝑖 1, 𝑖 2 }: 𝑖 1 links the contract to messages that reference it ( 𝑇 1 = ⟨governs , referencedIn ⟩), 

𝑖 2 bounds those messages to the discovery date range ( 𝑇 2 = ⟨sentOn ⟩). The policy block opens contract terms and non-privileged commu-nications inside the window and denies attorney–client material and out-of-scope memos. Crucially, privilege here behaves like in-ference closure (§6.1): a memo that merely quotes privileged legal AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands Khanzadeh et al. 

Table 2: Drug-interaction request over Alice’s Hospital A Chronicle fragment (§5.1). Denied triples marked ×; 𝑆 ∗ is the minimum released after authorization, structural sufficiency, and pruning. 

Policy rules. (evaluated by A on each edge). 

ID Condition Effect 

R1 user _type = treating _specialist ∧ purpose = drug _interaction _assessment evaluate R2 predicate _category = billing deny 

R3 predicate _category = session _note deny 

R4 predicate _category = diagnosis ∧ subcategory = psychiatric deny 

R5 predicate _category ∈ { prescription , allergy } permit 

R6 predicate _category = diagnosis ∧ subcategory = cardiac permit 

Chronicle fragment. 𝐺 HospA ⊂ 𝐺 C𝑢 (situation 𝑠 Jun24 anchors the June visit). 

Triple (𝑠, 𝑝, 𝑜 ) Category A(𝑠 Jun24 , situationOf , Alice ) context permit 

(Alice , hasDiagnosis , AFib ) diagnosis/cardiac permit 

(Alice , hasDiagnosis , MDD ) diagnosis/psychiatric × R4 

(Alice , prescribed , Warfarin ) prescription permit 

(Warfarin , hasDosage , 5mg ) prescription permit 

(Alice , prescribed , Amiodarone ) prescription permit 

(Amiodarone , hasDosage , 200 mg ) prescription permit 

(Alice , hasAllergy , Penicillin ) allergy permit 

(Alice , attendedSession , Note447 ) session_note × R3 

(Alice , billed , Claim8821 ) billing × R2 

Compilation steps. (a) Authorization filter: remove MDD, Note447, and Claim8821; C𝑎, HospA retains seven edges. (b) Relevance retrieval: match 𝑖 1 to both prescription chains and 𝑖 2 to the allergy triple. (c) Structural sufficiency: two ⟨prescribed , hasDosage ⟩ walks, one ⟨hasAllergy ⟩ walk; PredComplete on 

Π (𝑄 ). (d) Minimality pruning: drop authorized AFib diagnosis; retain 𝑠 Jun24 as minimal provenance connector. 

Resulting 𝑆 ∗. (six triples released). 

Released triples 

(𝑠 Jun24 , situationOf , Alice )(Alice , prescribed , Warfarin )(Warfarin , hasDosage , 5mg )(Alice , prescribed , Amiodarone )(Amiodarone , hasDosage , 200 mg )(Alice , hasAllergy , Penicillin )

advice must be denied even though its predicate type is commu-nication , or the release leaks through structure. Minimality raises the same tension as the medical case in a different guise—a single contract clause pulled free of its surrounding negotiation thread can be technically responsive yet misleading, so the “smallest sufficient” set for fair discovery may be larger than the one a literal template match returns. Same protocol, different ontology, user types, and policy—and a different 𝑆 ∗ with the same open question about what sufficiency should mean. 

## 6 Protocol 

The protocol runs on a federated topology: each peer keeps its Chronicle local, a lightweight coordinator handles discovery and en-tity alignment, and no central service stores or indexes raw Chron-icle data. Data stays distributed; policy gates whatever leaves the holder boundary. Two phases implement a core invariant: text before artifacts .

Phase 1: Authorized Evidence Compilation. 

(1) Request: The requester’s agent sends (𝑄, VP )—request 𝑄 plus a verifiable presentation [ 36 ] binding identity, role, and institu-tional affiliation to a decentralized identifier (DID). (2) Request planning: A planner (symbolic or LLM-based) decom-poses 𝑄 into information needs —schema-level patterns from the domain-expert ontology (e.g., “current prescriptions for holder 𝑢 ”). Holders receive these patterns, not instance-level request content, so the ask itself does not leak. (3) Local compilation: Each holder 𝐻 𝑖 runs three steps on its local fragment: (a) Authorization filtering: evaluate A ( 𝑟, 𝑝, 𝑒 ) for each element, producing C𝑖,𝑎 .(b) Relevance retrieval: within C𝑖,𝑎 , pull Situation-Graph nodes and edges matching the information needs via entity linking, embedding similarity, or temporal traversal. (c) Minimality pruning: run subgraph optimization (e.g., Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree with authorization-weighted penal-ties) to extract a compact connected subgraph covering those elements, yielding 𝑆 𝑖 ; this approximates the objective in Eq. (1) rather than guaranteeing a global minimum. Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands 

(4) Assembly: The coordinator merges {𝑆 1, . . . , 𝑆 𝑘 } into 𝑆 ∗ = Ð 𝑆 𝑖 ,resolves entity alignment across holders, and re-runs the suffi-ciency validator (§4.3) on the assembled 𝑆 ∗ against the full I ( 𝑄 )

before delivery. Cross-holder entity alignment is a privacy-sensitive step that the protocol depends on but does not solve here: we assume a privacy-preserving record-linkage primitive (e.g., Bloom-filter matching) that links co-referent entities with-out revealing unmatched identifiers, and we treat its integration with predicate-rich, temporal Chronicle structure as an open problem. (5) Delivery: The compiled evidence 𝑆 ∗ is returned to the requester’s agent with provenance references to specific Situation Graphs and triples. When the consumer is LLM-based, 𝑆 ∗ may addi-tionally serialize into a grounded prompt with 𝑄 ; the disclosure boundary is fixed at compilation time, not at generation time. This enumeration is the compiler of Eq. (1) , with Algorithm 1 as a subroutine: filtering (a) enforces constraint (ii); retrieval (b) and pruning (c) search for a small 𝑆 ; and the validator enforces constraint (iii)—locally per holder on 𝑆 𝑖 , then on the merged 𝑆 ∗.The validator decides, the protocol searches; no component both minimizes and certifies minimality, which is why we call the output compact, not provably smallest (§4.2). 

Phase 2: Artifact Release (Holder-Approved). Phase 1 returns text plus provenance pointers—not raw artifacts. If the requester needs the underlying asset (lab report image, audio clip, etc.), a follow-up references the provenance IDs from Phase 1. Artifact re-lease is governed more strictly than text: (i) it re-evaluates A on the artifact node and any edges it introduces, so Phase-1 authorization is necessary but not sufficient; (ii) it may add an artifact-release policy (higher user-type bar or per-artifact rules) beyond the text’s; and (iii) it always requires explicit, per-artifact holder approval—a mandatory human gate, not a pre-authorizable default. High-fidelity data never rides along with a text response. 

## 6.1 Threat Model 

Two threat surfaces, handled separately; first we fix scope. In scope: 

a malicious requester exceeding authorization, inference by the con-suming agent, and prompt injection into an LLM-based consumer .

Out of scope (as assumptions or open problems): a coordinator we as-sume honest-but-curious, seeing only compiled, already-authorized 

𝑆 𝑖 and alignment metadata (a Byzantine coordinator is future work); 

forged credentials , since we assume the verifiable-presentation/DID layer (§6) is sound; holder collusion to reconstruct denied data; 

provenance-reference leakage , treating Phase-1 IDs as opaque capa-bility handles that reveal nothing without an authorized Phase-2 release (proving this is open); and prompt injection into the plan-ner , a malicious 𝑄 steering I ( 𝑄 ) over-broad—a live risk, since the planner gates soundness (§4.2). 

Access-control threats. A malicious requester tries to pull Chron-icle data beyond their authorization. The access controller enforces 

A at the holder boundary; nothing leaves unless individually per-mitted. We assume the holder’s local system is trusted (standard in federated learning). 

Consumer inference threats. Even a correct 𝑆 ∗ can leak through inference (e.g., inferring a psychiatric diagnosis from a psychiatric medication in 𝑆 ∗). When the consumer is LLM-based, prompt injec-tion may additionally override behavioral guards [ 26 ]. Mitigations: (1) Inference closure: optionally extend A so that if a node is denied, edges that would enable high-confidence inference of that node are denied too. (2) Decoupled disclosure: policy applies at compilation time—not via post-hoc redaction or instructions to self-censor. (3) Post-disclosure irreversibility: once evidence is delivered, it can-not be unshared. The two-phase flow limits blast radius by shipping references first and artifacts only on explicit approval. 

## 7 Conclusion 

Sharing Chronicles—the temporal, predicate-labeled graphs at the core of Perspective-Aware AI—needs a minimum-necessary dis-closure layer that today’s selective-disclosure, federated KG, and subgraph-retrieval stacks do not jointly provide. Our technical con-tribution is to frame Chronicle disclosure as minimum-necessary, policy-constrained subgraph compilation over temporal, predicate-labeled Situation Graphs : given a relationship, purpose, and query, compile a compact authorized evidence subgraph—minimal under a stated objective (Eq. (1) ), sufficient under an explicit provenance-complete structural check (Algorithm 1), and released provenance-first through a two-phase federated protocol. We defined the con-structs, separated the sufficiency validator from the compiler that searches for 𝑆 ∗, gave an explicit threat model, and instantiated the design in medical and litigation domains. Next up: formalize the compilation problem, ship an efficient approximation, prototype on the PAi stack, and evaluate against a purpose-annotated Chronicle benchmark. 

## References                              

> [1] Rakesh Agrawal, Jerry Kiernan, Ramakrishnan Srikant, and Yirong Xu. 2002. Hippocratic Databases. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB) . 143–154. [2] Marjan Alirezaie, Daniel Platnick, Hossein Rahnama, Dava J Newman, and Alex Paul" Sandy" Pentland. 2025. Perspective-aware ai (pai) for augmenting critical decision making. (2025). doi:10.36227/techrxiv.173602815.51151031/v2 [3] Christopher Allen. 2016. The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity. http://www. lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html. [4] Jad Asswad and Jorge Marx Gómez. 2021. Data Ownership: A Survey. Information
> 12, 11 (2021). doi:10.3390/info12110465 [5] Asaph Azaria, Ariel Ekblaw, Thiago Vieira, and Andrew Lippman. 2016. Medrec: Using blockchain for medical data access and permission management, In Inter-national Conference on Open and Big Data. International Conference on Open and Big Data , 25–30. doi:10.1109/OBD.2016.11 [6] Eugene Bagdasarian, Ren Yi, Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Peter Kairouz, Marco Gruteser, Sewoong Oh, Borja Balle, and Daniel Ramage. 2024. Airgapagent: Protecting privacy-conscious conversational agents. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 3868–3882. [7] Juan Benet. 2014. IPFS - Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System. (2014). arXiv:1407.3561 [cs.NI] https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.3561 [8] Tim Berners-Lee et al .2015. Solid: A Platform for Social Web Applications. https://solidproject.org/, 223-226 pages. doi:10.1145/2872518.2890529 [9] Ji-Won Byun and Ninghui Li. 2008. Purpose based access control for privacy protection in relational database systems. The VLDB Journal 17, 4 (2008), 603–619. [10] Jeremy J Carroll, Christian Bizer, Pat Hayes, and Patrick Stickler. 2005. Named graphs, provenance and trust. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on World Wide Web . 613–622. [11] Ann Cavoukian et al .2009. Privacy by design: The 7 foundational principles.
> Information and privacy commissioner of Ontario, Canada 5, 2009 (2009), 12. [12] Luca Costabello, Serena Villata, and Fabien Gandon. 2012. Context-Aware Access Control for RDF Graph Stores.. In ECAI , Vol. 242. 282–287. [13] Richard Cyganiak, David Wood, and Markus Lanthaler. 2014. RDF 1.1 Concepts and Abstract Syntax. W3C Recommendation. https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/.

AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands Khanzadeh et al. 

[14] J. Fernández-Alemán, Inmaculada Carrión Señor, P. Lozoya, and J. Álvarez. 2013. Security and privacy in electronic health records: A systematic literature review. 

Journal of biomedical informatics 46, 3 (2013), 541–562. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2012.12. 003 [15] Philip WL Fong. 2011. Relationship-based access control: protection model and policy language. In Proceedings of the first ACM conference on Data and application security and privacy . 191–202. [16] Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Eugene Bagdasaryan, Ren Yi, Itay Yona, Ilia Shumailov, Aneesh Pappu, Chongyang Shi, Laura Weidinger, Robert Stanforth, Leonard Berrada, et al . 2024. Operationalizing contextual integrity in privacy-conscious assistants. [17] Thomas Hardjono, David L Shrier, and Alex Pentland. 2019. Trusted Data, revised and expanded edition: A New Framework for Identity and Data Sharing . MIT Press. [18] Steve Harris and Andy Seaborne. 2013. SPARQL 1.1 Query Language. W3C Recommendation. https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/. [19] Renato Iannella and Serena Villata. 2018. ODRL Information Model 2.2. W3C Recommendation. https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-model/. [20] Nerla Jean-Louis, Yunqi Li, Yan Ji, Harjasleen Malvai, Thomas Yurek, Sylvain Bellemare, and Andrew Miller. 2024. SGXonerated: Finding (and Partially Fixing) Privacy Flaws in TEE-based Smart Contract Platforms Without Breaking the TEE. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2024, 1 (2024), 569–585. doi:10.56553/popets-2024-0035 [21] Lalana Kagal, Tim Finin, and Anupam Joshi. 2003. A policy based approach to security for the semantic web. In International semantic web conference . Springer, 402–418. [22] Sabrina Kirrane, Alessandra Mileo, and Stefan Decker. 2016. Access control and the resource description framework: A survey. Semantic Web 8, 2 (2016), 311–352. [23] J. Kubiatowicz, D. Bindel, Yan Chen, S. Czerwinski, Patrick R. Eaton, D. Geels, R. Gummadi, Sean C. Rhea, Hakim Weatherspoon, Westley Weimer, et al . 2000. Oceanstore: An architecture for global-scale persistent storage. SIGP 34, 5 (2000), 190–201. doi:10.1145/356989.357007 [24] Rujia Li, Qin Wang, Qi Wang, David Galindo, and Mark Ryan. 2022. SoK: TEE-Assisted Confidential Smart Contract. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Tech-nologies 2022, 3 (2022), 711–731. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.08548 [25] Essam Mansour, Andrei Vlad Sambra, Sandro Hawke, Maged Zereba, Sarven Capadisli, Abdurrahman Ghanem, Ashraf Aboulnaga, and Tim Berners-Lee. 2016. A demonstration of the solid platform for social web applications, In The Web Conference. The Web Conference , 223–226. doi:10.1145/2872518.2890529 [26] Aiman Al Masoud, Marco Arazzi, and Antonino Nocera. 2026. SD-RAG: A Prompt-Injection-Resilient Framework for Selective Disclosure in Retrieval-Augmented Generation. arXiv.org (2026). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.11199 [27] Petar Maymounkov and David Mazieres. 2002. Kademlia: A peer-to-peer information system based on the xor metric, In International workshop on peer-to-peer systems. International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems , 53–65. doi:10.1007/3-540-45748-8_5 [28] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. https: //bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. [29] Helen Nissenbaum. 2004. Privacy as Contextual Integrity. Washington Law Review 79, 1 (2004), 119–158. [30] HHS Office for Civil Rights. 2002. Standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information. Final rule. Federal register 67, 157 (2002), 53181–53273. [31] Daniel Platnick, Mohamed E. Bengueddache, Marjan Alirezaie, Dava J. Newman, Alex ”Sandy” Pentland, and Hossein Rahnama. 2025. ID-RAG: Identity Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Long-Horizon Persona Coherence in Generative Agents. arXiv.org (2025). arXiv:2509.25299 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.25299 [32] Daniel Platnick, Matti Gruener, Marjan Alirezaie, Kent Larson, Dava J Newman, and Hossein Rahnama. 2025. Perspective-Aware AI in Extended Reality, In XR. 

XR , 85–97. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2507.11479 [33] Protocol Labs. 2024. libp2p: A Modular Network Stack . https://libp2p.io/ [34] Protection Regulation. 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Regulation (eu) 679, 2016 (2016), 10–3. [35] Secret Foundation. 2020. Secret Network Graypaper. https://scrt.network/ graypaper. [36] Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, and David Chadwick. 2022. Verifiable credentials data model v1. 1. W3C Recommendation. World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 

(2022). [37] Manu Sporny, Dave Longley, Markus Sabadello, Drummond Reed, Orie Steele, and Christopher Allen. 2022. Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0. W3C Recom-mendation. [38] Ion Stoica, Robert Morris, David Karger, M Frans Kaashoek, and Hari Balakrish-nan. 2001. Chord: A scalable peer-to-peer lookup service for internet applications. 

Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication 31, 4 (2001), 149–160. doi:10.1145/383059.383071 [39] Dominic Tarr, Erick Lavoie, Aljoscha Meyer, and C. Tschudin. 2019. Secure Scuttlebutt: An Identity-Centric Protocol for Subjective and Decentralized Appli-cations and Messaging, In Information-Centric Networking. Information-Centric Networking . doi:10.1145/3357150.3357396 [40] Dennis Trautwein, Aravindh Raman, Gareth Tyson, Ignacio Castro, Will Scott, Moritz Schubotz, Bela Gipp, and Yiannis Psaras. 2022. Design and evaluation of IPFS: a storage layer for the decentralized web, In Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication. Con-ference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication , 739–752. doi:10.1145/3544216.3544232 [41] Zooko Wilcox-O’Hearn and Brian Warner. 2008. Tahoe: the least-authority filesystem, In ACM International Workshop on Storage Security And Survivability. 

ACM International Workshop on Storage Security And Survivability , 21–26. doi:10. 1145/1456469.1456474 [42] Annika Wilde, Tim Niklas Gruel, Claudio Soriente, and Ghassan Karame. 2025. The Forking Way: When TEEs Meet Consensus. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) . doi:10.14722/ndss.2025.241934 [43] Guy Zyskind, Oz Nathan, and Alex Pentland. 2015. Enigma: Decentralized Computation Platform with Guaranteed Privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.03471 

(2015). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1506.03471 

## A Open Science 

This submission is a position and protocol-design paper. It does not report an implemented system, empirical evaluation, newly collected dataset, trained model, or human-subject study. Conse-quently, there are no code, data, model, or experimental artifacts associated with the claims made in the current version. All ma-terial needed to assess the contribution—including the problem formulation, authorization model, minimization objective, struc-tural sufficiency conditions, validator pseudocode, threat-model as-sumptions, protocol description, and worked medical and litigation examples—is contained in the manuscript. The examples are hypo-thetical and do not contain real personal, medical, or legal records. Future implementation and evaluation work will require a reference implementation, synthetic Chronicle instances, machine-readable ontologies and disclosure policies, and a purpose-annotated bench-mark; these future artifacts are not claimed or evaluated in this submission. 

## B Ethical Considerations 

This work is motivated by reducing unnecessary disclosure of sensi-tive information during interactions among AI agents. Provenance Preserving Chronicles are intended to keep personal data under the holder’s control, restrict disclosure according to the requester’s re-lationship and stated purpose, and require explicit holder approval before raw artifacts are released. These mechanisms may reduce exposure, but they do not eliminate ethical risk. An authorized subgraph can enable indirect inference of attributes that policy otherwise denies; provenance identifiers and cross-holder entity alignment can reveal metadata; and disclosed information may be copied, combined with other sources, retained indefinitely, or reused for purposes beyond the holder’s expectations. Once infor-mation has left the holder’s control, technical revocation cannot guarantee that all copies or derived inferences are removed. Errors or bias in request planning, ontology design, authoriza-tion policy, entity resolution, or minimization may cause either over-disclosure or under-disclosure. Under-disclosure is particu-larly important in the medical and litigation examples: an aggres-sively minimized response may satisfy a structural query while omitting context necessary for a clinically safe, legally fair, or oth-erwise well-founded decision. PPC should therefore be treated as a decision-support and disclosure-control mechanism, not as a sub-stitute for informed consent, professional judgment, applicable law, or institutional governance. Consequential deployments should Share No More Than the Request Requires: Federated Disclosure for Perspective-Aware AI AISec ’26, November 15, 2026, The Hague, Netherlands 

use authenticated roles and purposes, least-privilege defaults, au-ditable policy decisions, secure communication, privacy-preserving entity resolution, explicit per-artifact consent, and meaningful hu-man review. Policies and ontologies should also be evaluated for systematic over- or under-disclosure across demographic groups, institutions, and resource settings. Holders should receive under-standable notice of what information was shared, with whom, for what purpose, and the practical limits of revocation. This paper reports no human-subject study and processes no real personal records. 

## Use of Generative AI 

Generative AI tools, including ChatGPT (OpenAI) and Claude (An-thropic), were used primarily for grammar correction, language polishing, and document and LaTeX formatting. They also assisted in preparing initial drafts of the Open Science and Ethical Consid-erations sections and this disclosure statement. The human authors determined the research problem, technical design, formalization, threat model, analysis, and conclusions. All AI-assisted text was critically reviewed, revised, and verified by the authors, who re-tain full responsibility for the accuracy, originality, citations, and integrity of the manuscript.