Title: A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.30586v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 02:39:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage ⋆

## Gervais Hatungimana a,∗, Abdun Naser Mahmood b and Mohammad Jabed Morshed Chowdhury c

> a

Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Ransomware detection network traffic analysis Indicators of Compromise machine learning early detection evasive ransomware endpoint protection intrusion detection cybersecurity 

A B S T R A C T 

Most corporate workplace environments enforce policies and technical controls that limit the storage of sensitive data on client endpoints. Consequently, ransomware operators have evolved variants that expand their attack surface from local systems to network drives and shared storage resources. As traditional endpoint detection mechanisms focus primarily on local system behaviour, a compromised client can impact remote file servers, such as by encrypting shared data, without directly triggering behavioural changes on the servers themselves. In this paper, we propose a hybrid detection framework for detecting crypto-ransomware intrusion within integrated file server and client environments. The framework is based on a new technique referred to as Region of Interest (RoI) to analyse network traffic and extract Indicators of Compromise (IoCs). The IoC repository serves as an additional ruleset to enhance existing security tools such as EDRs and IDSs, while RoI-derived features are used to train an ML model to detect highly evasive variants. This study incorporates a broader set of ransomware families and carefully selected benign behaviours based on domain expertise, ensuring coverage of common user actions that could interfere with ransomware detection. Beyond IoCs, which operate in a signature-based manner, our machine learning module achieves a detection precision of 99.64%, with a 0% false negative rate (FNR) and a minimal false positive rate (FPR). Furthermore, the proposed method enables early detection, identifying ransomware intrusions before significant damage occurs, achieving an accuracy of 99.44%. 

## 1. Introduction 

Although ransomware is often considered a recent phe-nomenon in cybersecurity, the concept of taking computer data hostage dates back to 1989 with the creation of the AIDS Trojan. Developed by Dr Joseph Popp, an evolution-ary biologist and Harvard University alumnus, the Trojan was distributed following the World Health Organisation (WHO) AIDS conference in Stockholm. Popp sent infected floppy disks by mail to conference attendees, marking one of the first known instances of malicious software designed to extort individuals for financial gain. Victims of the AIDS Trojan were initially asked to pay approximately $189 to regain access to their encrypted data [15]. Since then, new variants and ransomware families have emerged each year, evolving in both complexity and impact. Unlike traditional computer viruses, ransomware typically does not cause per-manent damage to the operating system. However, it can disable certain system services, often rendering it unusable until the victim pays the ransom. One of the most prevalent types of ransomware is crypto-ransomware, which encrypts the victim’s data and demands payment in exchange for the decryption key. From a destructive standpoint, crypto-ransomware remains one of the most significant threats due to its ability to lock critical data. The strategies to combat ransomware attacks involve a combination of electronic and non-electronic methods. Non-electronic strategies primarily focus on educating users about cybersecurity threats, with a particular emphasis on 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> G.Hatungimana@latrobe.edu.au

(G. Hatungimana) 

> ORCID

(s): 

social engineering techniques used by cybercriminals. Elec-tronic strategies, on the other hand, involve the deployment of specialized software on target endpoints to prevent the successful execution of ransomware or other forms of mal-ware. So far, electronic methods have proven to be the most reliable defence against ransomware attacks. However, the software tools currently used to detect ransomware often fall short of expectations, particularly due to the novel and ad-vanced techniques employed by cybercriminals, which lead to Zero-Day attacks. To mitigate the challenges posed by zero-day vulnerabilities, numerous scholarly articles, such as those presented in 1, suggest leveraging the power of Machine Learning (ML) to enhance the effectiveness of existing detection tools. In addition to Zero-Day attacks, ransomware operators have increasingly adopted advanced techniques and hack-ing practices to compromise their targets and ensure the successful execution of ransomware payloads. This practice is commonly referred to as "evasion.". To counter these evolving threats, it is recommended that detection tools be enhanced to identify incidents without relying solely on the host system’s state. One potential approach is to expand the scope of detection by incorporating other sources of infor-mation, such as network traffic, which can provide additional insight into the attack. Most corporate workplace environments enforce policies and technical controls that limit the storage of sensitive data on client endpoints. One of the widely used techniques used for file sharing in the Windows environment is the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 12 

> arXiv:2606.30586v1 [cs.CR] 29 Jun 2026 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage

SMB was developed in 1983 to enable file sharing be-tween computers on a network, allowing remote devices (servers) to make files accessible to clients over a TCP/IP connection. Since its inception, SMB has undergone sev-eral improvements. SMBv1 was implemented with Win-dows Server 2003 but was found to be vulnerable to the EternalBlue exploit and was subsequently deprecated in 2003. SMBv2 replaced SMBv1 in Windows Server 2008 and Windows Vista, and is still widely used despite being susceptible to eavesdropping vulnerabilities because as all messages exchanged between the server and the client are transmitted in plain text. The latest version, SMBv3, supports data encryption to address these security concerns. Both SMBv2 and SMBv3 are still supported and actively used. [13]. For instance, con-temporary Microsoft operating systems, including Windows 10, Windows 11, and Windows Server versions such as 2019, 2022, and 2025, enable SMBv2 and later versions by default and negotiate the highest mutually supported SMB dialect during communication. In addition to general-purpose IT systems, SMBv2 is commonly encountered in legacy and constrained environ-ments, including Internet of Things (IoT) and Operational Technology (OT) systems, where long device lifecycles, vendor dependencies, and limited firmware update capabili-ties often delay adoption of newer SMB dialects. SMBv2 is also widely implemented in non-Windows platforms, such as Samba-based systems and network-attached storage devices, enabling interoperability across heterogeneous networks. SMB data consists of commands initiated by the client to access and manipulate remote files hosted on a remote server. The SMB data structure includes various headers that carry different commands [10]. As data move through the layers of the OSI model [6], they undergo an encapsulation process. As depicted in Fig.1, the SMB data is passed to the transport layer, where it is divided into smaller chunks, known as segments or streams, based on the maximum number of bytes that can be transmitted at once. The size of these segments is determined through a negotiation process governed by TCP standards. At the transport layer, the TCP header is added to each segment, which is then passed to the network layer. The network layer adds IP addresses to the segment, ensuring that they can be routed across the network. At this point, the segment is called a packet, which is forwarded to the data link layer for final delivery. A typical use case for this protocol is an environment consisting of a File Server and multiple Client PCs. Client PCs access files hosted on the File Server via mapped network drives. In this paper, we propose a hybrid detection framework for detecting crypto-ransomware intrusion within enterprise Shared Storage. This approach improves detection accuracy and robustness and enables timely alerts in the earliest stages of the attack, thus enhancing the overall response to ransomware threats.  

> Figure 1: SMB Encapsulation

While research on ransomware detection in file-share environments is not new, previous studies still have several limitations, such as: 

• Risk of dataset and environmental bias: The inclu-sion of real-user traffic as a benign baseline does not guarantee environment neutrality. User behaviour is strongly influenced by organisational context, system usage patterns, and access controls, which may limit the comparability of benign and malicious traffic across different environments. Furthermore, there is no assurance that legitimate user activity within the observed environment is capable of generating behavioural patterns comparable to ransomware oper-ations, particularly with respect to file access rates, di-rectory traversal, and network share interactions. Con-sequently, the detection model may capture environment-specific workload characteristics rather than invariant indicators of ransomware behaviour. 

• Limited reproducibility and comparability: Net-work traffic collected from real production environ-ments is typically subject to privacy and confidential-ity constraints and is therefore unlikely to be shared. The unavailability of such datasets limits the ability of other researchers to reproduce the results, indepen-dently evaluate the proposed technique, or perform fair comparisons with alternative approaches. 

• Partial Dataset: The lack of datasets containing both malicious and benign samples remains a significant challenge for ransomware detection research. A comparison of existing scholarly articles and our ap-proach is summarised in Tab.1. The limitations identified in previous research and the reasons why this study is necessary can generally be grouped as follows: 

1.1. Contributions 

In this sub-section, we highlight our contributions to-wards addressing issues as previously discussed. 1. A new feature engineering technique referred to as the Region of Interest (RoI). While numerous scholarly                         

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage
> Table 1
> Comparison of our design and closely related works
> Work DESIGN Environment Neutral Reproducibility Full Dataset
> Technique
> Features Engineering Techniques
> IoC-based Detection
> [2] Threshold 1 Sec. Window ####
> [8] ML 1 Sec. Window ####
> Ours ML RoI !!!!

articles rely on flow-based approaches [14] and time window methodologies, each of these approaches has its inherent limitations, as outlined earlier in this sec-tion. The RoI technique mitigates these limitations by using clear demarcation codes to define specific data samples, thus reducing the potential for bias in design. This method is both simple and reproducible, enabling more effective comparisons of results across various studies. 2. A new hybrid framework combining machine learn-ing (ML) techniques with Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) to detect known and unknown ransomware at an early stage. The framework integrates newly dis-covered network-based IoCs with network perimeter devices to enhance ransomware detection capabilities. Experimental results demonstrate that the machine learning model is capable of identifying unknown ran-somware with high accuracy and a low false negative rate. The synergy between these components provides a robust tool for mitigating ransomware attacks, of-fering significant potential to improve cybersecurity defences. 3. We present two new datasets to advance ransomware detection. The first supports machine learning, cov-ering 22 ransomware families and 15 benign apps selected for behavioural similarity to ransomware to reduce bias. The second contains ransomware Indica-tors of Compromise (IoCs) from these families. These datasets offer value to both research and industry. 

## 2. Related Works 

In this section, we review various techniques proposed in previous scholarly articles for ransomware detection in a file-server environment. The REDFISH algorithm was proposed in [2]. Morato et al. analysed the SMBv2 protocol in network traffic to design a ransomware detection algorithm in file-sharing environ-ments. The study involved 50 samples from 19 ransomware families. The algorithm detects ransomware activity early by analysing file-sharing network traffic, specifically SMB op-erations on shared directories. It monitors the sequence and timing of file read, write, and deletion operations, looking for patterns characteristic of ransomware, such as rapid reading of files followed by immediate writing of encrypted content. REDFISH raises an alarm when a predefined number of file deletions ( 𝑁 ) occur within a short time window ( 𝑇 )and the average read/write throughput exceeds a threshold (𝑉 thres ). By correlating these events in real time, the algo-rithm identifies ransomware activity before significant data loss occurs, without requiring any software on the endpoints. A significant limitation of the REDFISH algorithm is that it requires parsing all network traffic to extract file paths and SMB commands, which can introduce substantial com-putational overhead, particularly in high-throughput net-works. Furthermore, the algorithm assumes certain file and directory structures in the shared environment; variations in organisational layouts or folder hierarchies may impact the accuracy of early detection. Additionally, the method relies on visibility of file-sharing traffic, so encrypted or obfuscated SMB sessions could hinder its effectiveness. A Machine Learning (ML) model was recently proposed in [8]. E.Berrueta et al. (2022) extended SMB traffic with a focus on the newer SMBv3 protocol. The study correlates TCP packets exchanged between the client and server with ransomware-related file operations, including read, write, and other command activities. These events are aggregated within one-second time windows, resulting in dataset fea-tures that represent the accumulated byte volumes across different time intervals. While different ML model been tested with different time intervals, Neural Networks (NE) maintains the accuracy over 99%. 

## 3. Proposed Method 

Based on gaps towards ransomware detection as dis-cussed previously, this section presents details about the Hybrid framework for detecting crypto ransomware in a file share environment. The framework heavily relies on packet codes referred to as packets of interest ( 𝑃 𝑜𝐼 ) and Indicators of compromise (𝐼𝑜𝐶 ). We extracted codes for encrypted (SMBv3) and non-encrypted (SMBv2) environments. However, in order to maintain paper conciseness, we present the framework using SMBv2 codes. We keep equivalent codes for SMBv3 in a separate IoC dataset. The main modules of this framework include Per Packet IoC Detection, Per RoI Detection and ML-Based detection.    

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage
> Figure 2: Hybrid Detection Framework

As depicted in Fig.2, the combination of these compo-nents enables early detection, automatic remediation, and effective incident management. The system inspects each network packet for well-known behaviours using IoC. If the packet matches any IoC, indicating a known attack, the system immediately triggers automatic remediation, halting further processing. If the packet does not contain any IoC, it is then passed through the Region of Interest (RoI) process. This method analyses the packet’s context and behaviour to identify suspicious activity or unknown attack patterns. If RoI analysis identifies the packet as malicious, the system alerts the Security Operations Centre (SOC) team for further investigation and response. 

3.1. Per Packet IoC Based Detection Phase 

This module scans individual packets against known indicators, such as the presence of extortion message drops, and initiates immediate remediation upon detecting a match. The ransomware must inform the victim about the damage and provide instructions on how to make payments( extortion ). The commonly used way to do that is by dropping extortion messages in one or more folders on the victim’s device. It is the only file that does not get encrypted. The length or size of such a file depends on the information it contains; it is different from family to family. Since each family has a unique message size, it becomes an Indicator of Compromise (IoC) for well-known ransomware families. In experimen-tation, the message size can be manually depicted through the file properties and then stored in the 𝐼𝑜𝐶 repository for reference during live traffic inspection. Some characteristics of such files we found so far include: 

• It appears once in one folder 

• It is always a result of 𝐶 410 , a newly created file 

• It is the same size across all folders 

• It can be split into small chunks to evade detection We use the procedure in algorithm 1 to inspect the network packet. For each network packet subsequent to the SMBv2 packet of length 410, if the packet length value matches any 

𝐼𝑜𝐶 that we collected, that packet is malicious, and an alarm or corrective action is triggered. If nothing is matched, that packet proceeds to the next phase. 

3.2. Per RoI, IoC Based Detection Phase 

Certain variants of evasive ransomware attempt to con-ceal their extortion messages by fragmenting them into multiple packets. When individual packets fail to match   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage

Algorithm 1 Per Packet 𝐼𝑜𝐶 Based Detection Procedure  

> 1:

Let 𝑃 𝑖 = 𝐹 𝑜𝑟𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡  

> 2:

Let 𝑙 = 𝑃 𝑖 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟  

> 3:

for each 𝑃 𝑖 [𝑙 ] do  

> 4:

𝐼𝑓 (𝜃𝑃 𝑖 [𝑙 ] ∈ 𝐼𝑜𝐶 ) 

> 5:

𝑃 𝑖 == 𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

end for 

indicators of compromise (IoCs) in earlier modules, the sys-tem employs Region of Interest (RoI) techniques to identify potential ransomware extortion message drops that may have been fragmented as an evasion tactic. The details about extracting 𝑅𝑜𝐼 are explained in section 4.2.1. As depicted in algorithm 2, for each unique value of the Length feature in 𝑅𝑜𝐼 forward packets, if the ratio between the sum of all packets with the same length value and itself matches any 𝐼𝑜𝐶 , then 𝑅𝑜𝐼 is malicious and alarm or correction action is triggered. If nothing is matched, the 

𝑅𝑜𝐼 proceeds to the last checkpoint via Machine Learning. 

Algorithm 2 Per 𝑅𝑜𝐼 𝐼𝑜𝐶 Based Detection Procedure 

Require: 𝐹 𝑜𝐼 ⊂ 𝑅𝑜𝐼 ; A Set of forward packets flow after 

𝑟𝑝 410 packet  

> 1:

Let 𝑅𝑜𝐼 [𝑙 ] = { 𝑙 𝑖 }, 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑖 ∈ {1 , ..., 𝑛 }; 𝑛 == ∀ 𝑅𝑜𝐼 

and 𝑙 == Length feature value  

> 2:

for each 𝑙 𝑖 ∈ 𝑅𝑜𝐼 do  

> 3:

𝐼𝑓 ( (∑ 𝜃𝑙 𝑖 )

> 𝜃𝑙 𝑖

∈ 𝐼𝑜𝐶 ) Then  

> 4:

𝑅𝑜𝐼 = 𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

end for 

3.3. ML-Based Detection Phase 

This module is used to detect novel ransomware variants by analysing Region of Interest (RoI) packets for anomalous behaviours that deviate from established patterns. These behaviours may include the presence of encrypted data or irregular access to shared files, which are indicative of potential ransomware activity. Machine learning (ML) plays a pivotal role in artificial intelligence (AI) by enabling computers to mimic human thinking. ML involves various algorithms that classify data using techniques such as strata, probability, or decision trees. Each ML technique employs multiple methods to capture and manipulate patterns within existing data, allowing for the classification of unseen data. Well-known examples of these methods include Support Vector Machines (SVM), Neural Networks, Logistic Regression, Discriminant Anal-ysis, Random Forests, Linear Regression, Naïve Bayes, K-nearest neighbours, and Decision Trees. Notably, Neural Networks have evolved into an independent field known as Deep Learning, which has garnered significant attention in AI research. The choice of which ML technique or method to use depends on the nature and complexity of the data being analysed. A common characteristic across all ML methods is their reliance on a benchmark dataset, which serves as the basis for training the algorithms. Once a benchmark dataset is established, the next critical step is feature selection, which involves determining which data patterns should be used to train the model. This step marks a key distinction between traditional machine learning and deep learning, particularly when dealing with large datasets. In traditional ML, human intervention is often required to select the most relevant features for training. In contrast, deep learning models, par-ticularly neural networks, can autonomously identify which features are most relevant, minimising the need for man-ual feature selection. In this framework, we use Random Committee Machine Learning Model. The decision of this Random Committee over other ML techniques is after ex-perimentation results as discussed in section 6. 

## 4. Experimentation 

In this section, we present the techniques used for car-rying out the experimentation, including sample sources, execution, capturing network traces, and processing. 

4.1. Dataset 

E.Berrueta [3] developed and published a public data repository containing the results of executing over 70 ran-somware samples collected between 2015-2020 from dif-ferent families. The repository includes network traffic cap-tures (DNS and TCP) and file Input/Output (I/O) operations generated by each sample during its activity, including the read and written bytes, the time between open operations, the number of deletions, and the file sizes. The repository comprises ransomware families collected between 2015 and 2020. While valuable for benchmarking and reproducibility, it may not capture the behaviour of more recent ransomware strains and evolving attack techniques. Therefore, the devel-opment of updated datasets remains necessary to support contemporary studies and the evaluation of modern detec-tion approaches. We started building a testbed where we execute samples safely. As depicted in Fig. 3, we set up a client on a 64-bit Windows 10 Professional virtual machine with specs: 8 GB of memory, and 100 GB of SSD. The user does not have domain or local administrative rights. The user accesses the data folder through the mapped network drive. The other client PCs are for illustration purposes only and have not been used anywhere in a lab. We set up a Windows 2016 virtual machine as a file server with specs: 8 GB of memory and 100 GB. The file server has been set up with a data folder of 200 files in 8 sub-folders. The root folder is shared with default read and write permissions, and the server is also acting as a domain controller and DNS. The monitoring PC is a 64-bit Ubuntu 24 Virtual Ma-chine with 8 GB of memory and 50 GB of disk. All the virtual machines run on a 64-bit Ubuntu 24 host with specs: AMD RYZEN 5000 7 processor, 32 GB memory and 500 GB SSD and are connected to a virtual switch. The port    

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage
> Figure 3: Implementation Scenario

where the Monitoring VM is connected has been configured in promiscuous mode to listen to packets between Client01 and the File Server. Behind the scenes, the host is connected to the WatchGuard Firewall, which continuously logs net-work access activities. 

4.1.1. Ransomware Sample 

There are multiple publicly available sources of malware samples, including VirusShare, AnyRun, Malware Bazaar, etc. In order to download a sample, one must know the signature (usually hash values) of that malware. We searched multiple cybersecurity companies’reports for trending ran-somware attacks and related indicators of compromise (IoC) in order to get malware hashes. We realised that the most recent ransomware strains’ IoCs cannot be found anywhere other than in Virustotal. Unfortunately, downloading sam-ples from VirusTotal is not possible unless someone has a premium subscription, which costs about 600 euros monthly. So, if any IoC cannot be found in other places, it is dropped. We execute samples one by one in our testbed while cap-turing network traces between the client and file server for 10 minutes; a sample that does not encrypt the data folder is removed from the list (out of scope) because it might be human-operated ransomware, which requires manual opera-tion via C2C. The final list of ransomware families covered in this work is presented in Table 3. 

4.1.2. Benign Sample 

In a previous work, there are a few papers with details on the acquisition of benign samples. For example, Edwardo et al [8] created benign samples by intercepting network traffic in a real production environment. Fernando et al [9] used VeraCrypt, AxCrypt, BitLocker and 7-Zip for benign. For our method, we used an extensive approach for generating benign samples. We try to mimic most of the possible normal user actions, which causes behaviour closer to that of ransomware, as explained below and presented in Table 3. 1. Data Encryption. Practically, in a production environment where users access centrally hosted file servers, it is rare and unsafe to allow users to encrypt their data. The IT department would rather deploy such tools on the file server; that is why most commercial encryption tools are limited to local and extended disk partitions. However, there are a few tools that users can still use to encrypt data if required. 

Hicrypt ; We searched and found that Hicrypt is one of the few tools that can encrypt files on a network share. This tool allows a user to create an empty folder within a network share and then encrypt it. All new files which will be added to that folder later will get encrypted automatically. So we empty our network drive and encrypt it using Hicrypt , then we import it into the same data folder while capturing network packets.                          

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage
> Table 2
> Ransomware Samples
> Ransomware Group Number of RoI
> ako 8Coronavirus 8netwalker 41 Avoslocker 48 Hive 49 ragnarok 55 Clop 56 Darkside 58 Wannacry 62 CryptoLocker 78 alpha 79 backcat 81 mountlocker 81 Conti 87 neffilim 87 nemity 87 DoppelPaymer 88 ransomexx 92 Revil/Sodinokibi 110 lockbit2.0 121 maze 121 lockbit3.0 133

Windows Encrypt Utility ; Windows Encryption Util-ity can encrypt both local and network files. Though rarely allowed in a production environment, we de-cided to capture the behaviour of this action so that if it happens for some reason, our detection model should remain accurate and precise. 

WinRAR, Winzip,7Zip ; We realised that most file compression tools like WinRAR, WinZip and 7Zip have the option to encrypt compressed data. So we run these tools with an encryption option and then capture network traffic. The result of this operation is a compressed and encrypted file. We delete the compressed file before executing another tool. 2. Bulk Data Import and Delete. Among the actions that users generally perform on a network share are importing a bunch of data from other storage. This action triggers behaviour closer to ransomware due to the fact that many new files get created, and a lot of data is written at the same time. To mimic this action, we used Windows copy utility 

as the most used tool in real life. We also used third-party tools TeraCopy and UltraCopier because some users prefer them over Windows utilities. We empty the network drive, then paste it in the same folder being used for ransomware analysis and the other way around. 3. Data compression. Sometimes, a user might need to transfer large amounts of files via email, ftp, for sharing with external part-ners. This can be achieved by compressing multiple files and folders into one. By doing that, a new file                                                  

> Table 3
> Benign Samples
> Tool Action Number of RoIs
> Windows Utility Delete 11 Copy-In 4Copy-Out 8Encrypt 50 WinRAR Zip (.zip) 1Zip (.rar) 11 Encrypt 4WinZip Zip (.zip) 8Encrypt 652 7-Zip Zip (.zip) 8Zip (.7z) 4Encrypt 1TeraCopy Copy 43 UltraCopier Copy 69 HyCrypt Encrypt 1
> Table 4
> Required SMB Headers
> Category Field Description
> Defaults No The index number of the packet Defaults Time Time (seconds) elapsed since the capture started Defaults Source Where the packet is coming from Defaults Destination Where the packet is going Defaults Protocol The type of protocol used for this communication Defaults Length The length (in bytes) of the packet Defaults Info The information carried in the packet (payload) Additional smb2-header-len SMB header length Additional smb2-setinfo-size The size of data contained in SMB Set Command Additional smb2-writecount The size of data contained in SMB Write Command

( container ) is created, and files change extensions pretty much like what ransomware does when it changes the extension of all files after encryption and re-creates file contents. While there are many third-party tools for compressing files, we chose to use WinRAR, WinZip, and 7-Zip because they are the most used tools in the Windows environment. WinRAR and WinZip have output extensions that a user can choose from ( .zip and .rar). We run these tools while capturing network traffic. 

4.2. Features Engineering 

By default, Wireshark displays a limited set of fields for captured network traces, as shown in the Default Group   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage

Tab.4. To enhance the dataset for our experiment, it is nec-essary to include additional information beyond the default fields. To achieve this, we configure Wireshark to incorpo-rate the extra fields listed in the Additional Group Tab.4. Once the necessary fields are configured, we export the network traces in CSV format. This format is selected for its easy manipulation and efficient handling of the data during the subsequent stages of analysis and processing. Since SMB commands are transmitted over TCP connec-tions, duplicate packets can occasionally appear due to the connection-oriented nature of TCP. To address this, the mod-ule is configured to identify and remove duplicates. Some of the additional fields included in the preprocessing are specifically aimed at supporting this task, as the default fields alone may inadvertently lead to the removal of important packets. The final output of this pre-processing module is a clean CSV file, free from duplicates and containing all the neces-sary information required for further analysis in the subse-quent steps. 

4.2.1. Region of Interest RoI 

Processing network traffic traces for machine learning applications presents significant challenges, as individual network packets typically contain limited information on their own. Therefore, a critical step in applying machine learning to network traffic is aggregating individual pack-ets into more informative data samples. In this research, we introduce a novel method, referred to as the Region of Interest (RoI) technique, to address this issue. The RoI method aims to aggregate related packets into cohesive data samples, ensuring that the aggregated information captures the necessary context for downstream analysis and feature extraction. Server Message Block (SMB) messages typically 

Algorithm 3 Extracting 𝑅𝑜𝐼 Techniques 

Require:  == 𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 𝑃 𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑠  

> 1:

Let 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑗 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑡𝑤𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑝 𝑖 𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑝 𝑗  

> 2:

Let 𝑝 260 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑎 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ == 260 𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠  

> 3:

Let 𝑝 ≠ 𝑝 260 ∈ , where d is a network packet other than 𝑝 260  

> 4:

𝑅𝑂𝐼 𝑖 ← ∀𝑝 ∈ { 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑗 𝑗 }

consist of data operation commands for session setup and termination, file opening, reading, writing, status checks, and their respective responses [10]. Our research observed that the SMB client frequently navigates through directo-ries, enumerating contents in a back-and-forth manner. This behaviour is facilitated by a specific packet, which remains consistent in size (260 bytes) regardless of the environment or the directory paths being accessed. It serves as an indica-tor for an SMB client process, signalling it whether all items in the current directory have been enumerated and whether the client needs to traverse back or forward into other sub-directories. We refer to this packet as 𝑝 260 and is extracted using the algorithm in 3. The procedure outlined in Algorithm 3 requires a set of network packet traces collected from the time the first 

𝑝 260 appears to the subsequent 𝑝 260 , excluding the latter. Consequently, we define the Region of Interest (RoI) as the set of activities between two consecutive 𝑝 260 packets. The encryption process takes plain text as input into the cypher algorithm in order to produce a ciphertext. That means, the original file contents are replaced with cypher text. Ransomware goes the extra mile by changing the exten-sion of the file. We discovered that the mission is completed using special SMB commands referred to as Commands of Interest ( 𝐶𝑜𝐼 ) as explained below. 1. At some point in time, a client wants to read a file that does not exist yet; So it will create it, and the server shall reply confirming that a new file has been created. This response/backward packet has been found with a static length of (410) regardless of the environment or file path. This 𝐶𝑜𝐼 is referred to as 𝑟𝑝 410 .2. At some point in time, the client will read any file in the current directory; this forward packet has been found with a static length of (171) regardless of envi-ronment or file path. This 𝐶𝑜𝐼 is referred to as 𝑟𝑞 171 

3. At some point in time,, a client will write data to files in the current directory and the server shall reply with the number of bytes written to that file. This backward/response packet has been found with a static length (138) regardless of the environment or file path. This 𝐶𝑜𝐼 is referred to as 𝑟𝑝 138 .4. At some point in time, the client will attempt to open a file/folder, and the server responds with 𝑟𝑝 378 .5. At some point in time, the client wants to set new information on files, such as renaming. This forward packet has been found with a static length of (124) regardless of the environment or file path. This 𝐶𝑜𝐼 

is referred to as 𝑟𝑞 124 .6. At some point in time, the client will close the open file/folder. This forward packet has been found with a static length of 𝑟𝑞 146 .Based on 𝐶𝑜𝐼 as explained above, we compute basic features ( 𝐵𝐹 ) using algorithm 5. For each 𝑅𝑜𝐼 , we count the frequency of each 𝐶𝑜𝐼 .Normally, you can save new data by creating a new file, writing on it, then saving, or by opening an existing file, writing additional data, then saving. The relevant 𝐶𝑜𝐼 as earlier discussed are 𝑟𝑞 171 ,𝑟𝑝 410 and 𝑟𝑝 138 . 𝑟𝑝 138 tells us that new data has been successfully saved either following the modification on an existing file 𝑟𝑞 171 or by creating a new one 𝑟𝑝 410 .As depicted in algorithm 4, for each Write response packet, we find whether it has been triggered by reading an existing file ( 𝑟𝑞 171 ) or by creating a new file ( 𝑟𝑝 410 ). The latest trigger to occur before that write response is considered (the closest command to the write response). Next, from the extracted 𝐶𝑇 𝑊 and 𝑅𝑇 𝑊 , we compute total, mean, and Standard Deviation. The features as results of this algorithm are explained in Table 6   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 12

A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage 

Table 5 

Extracted Basic Features 

Feature Description Related 𝐶𝑂𝐼 

Source The origin of a packet (IP address) n/a Destination The destination of a packet (IP address) n/a Duration Activity duration n/a Read Number of files read 171 Open Number of files and directories opened 378 Modify Number of newly created files 410 Write Number of files with content modified 138 Set Number of files with modified attributes 124 Close Number of files and folders closed 146 Label Ransomware family or Benign Application Name n/a 

Table 6 

Computed (Extended) Features 

Feature Description Related 𝐶𝑂𝐼 

rtw_cnt Number of write responses trig-gered by read C171 rtw_tot Total written data triggered by read C171 rtw_mean Mean of written data triggered by read C171 rtw_stdv Standard deviation of written data triggered by read C171 rtw_mrw Most repeating written data triggered by read C171 ctw_cnt Number of write responses trig-gered by create C410 ctw_tot Total written data triggered by create C410 ctw_mean Mean of written data triggered by create C410 ctw_stdv Standard deviation of written data triggered by create C410 ctw_mrw Most repeating written data triggered by create C410 

4.2.2. Features Standardization 

The cumulative values obtained as results of algorithm 4 vary from one production environment to another, as the structure and size of the shared network directory are different and have different infrastructure setups. In order to generalise our method for different environments, we introduced a script to be installed on the file server for con-stantly reporting statistics of files and directories available in the shared network drive (Probing). We use the probe 

Algorithm 4 Extended Features Computation Techniques 

Require: 𝑅𝑜𝐼  

> 1:

Let 𝐶𝑇 𝑊 = ∅ ; Stands for Create Then Write packets as results of 𝑝 410  

> 2:

Let 𝑅𝑇 𝑊 == ∅ ; Stands for Read Then Writes packet as results of 𝑝 171  

> 3:

Let 𝑐 ∈ 𝑅𝑜𝐼 = {410 , 171} ; a set of centroids packets  

> 4:

Let 𝑟𝑝 138( 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈{1 , ..., 𝑛 }; any Write response packet within 𝑅𝑜𝐼  

> 5:

For each 𝑟𝑝 138 𝑖 ∶ 

> 6:

if {( 𝑟𝑝 138 𝑖 − 𝑐 0) == 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 } then  

> 7:

𝐶𝑇 𝑊 ← 𝑟𝑝 138 𝑖 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ] 

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

if {( 𝑟𝑝 138 𝑖 − 𝑐𝑖 1) == 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 } then  

> 10:

𝑅𝑇 𝑊 ← 𝐶 138 𝑖 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ] 

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

𝐿𝑒𝑡𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝑇 𝑊  

> 13:

𝐿𝑒𝑡𝑦 ∈ 𝐶𝑇 𝑊  

> 14:

𝐿𝑒𝑡𝜇, 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑥 𝑜𝑟 𝑦  

> 15:

X = ∑(𝑥 𝑖 ) 

> 16:

𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑋 = ∑𝑖 

> 0

(𝑥 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ])  

> 17:

𝜇 𝑥 = 𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑋 𝑋  

> 18:

Y = ∑(𝑦 𝑖 ) 

> 19:

𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑌 = ∑𝑖 

> 0

(𝑦 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ])  

> 20:

𝜇 𝑦 = 𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑌 𝑌  

> 21:

sdvX= 

√ 

> {∑(𝑥 𝑖 −𝜇 𝑥 )2
> 𝑋
> 22:

sdvY= 

√ {∑(𝑦 𝑖 −𝜇 𝑦 )2 

> 𝑌
> 23:

𝑀𝑅𝑊 𝑥 == 𝑥 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ]𝑖 ∈ 𝑋, 𝑚𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡  

> 24:

𝑀𝑅𝑊 𝑦 == 𝑦 [𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ]𝑖 ∈ 𝑌 , 𝑚𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡 

Algorithm 5 Basic Features Computation Procedure 

Require: 𝑅𝑜𝐼  

> 1:

Let 𝑙 ; 𝑎 𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒  

> 2:

Let 𝑃 ; 𝑃 (𝑙 ) ∉ {410 , 171 , 138 , 124 , 146}; 𝑎 𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡  

> 3:

for each 𝐶𝑜𝐼 ∈ {410 , 171 , 138 , 124 , 146} do  

> 4:

𝐵𝐹 = ∀ 𝑃 , 𝑃 (𝑙 ) == 𝐶𝑜𝐼  

> 5:

end for 

information; the number of files ( 𝑛 ) of the shared drive at the time of capture to convert basic features ( 𝐵𝐹 ) into rates based on 100 files as per equation 1. The number of features (fields) computed and what each stands for is presented in Table 5. 

 =  ∗ 100 

𝑛 (1) 

4.3. Train Machine Learning Model 

In this sub-section, we use the dataset that we created as per previous sub-sections to create a learning model that detects the ransomware based on historical sample data. The original dataset from the testbed is imbalanced with 844 

benign and 1600 ransomware data samples. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage 

• Data Sanitation . We removed data samples corre-sponding to 𝐼𝑜𝐶 . We do this because these data have well-known and distinct characteristics for all ran-somware families that cannot be found anywhere with benign samples. These data are collected in a separate repository of 𝐼𝑜𝐶 as previously explained to serve for 𝐼𝑜𝐶 detection phases. This results in reduced ransomware data samples up to 1262 .

• Data Balancing As it is always a good idea to use a balanced dataset when training an ML model, we used a Python function to select random 844 from 

1262 ransomware samples. This task was done while the ransomware samples still had labels (Ransomware Family Name) to make sure that all families are rep-resented. Then we labelled instances of the resulting sub-dataset as ransomware. 

• Training Vs Testing . Supervised Machine Learn-ing, required labelled sample data for training and unlabeled ones for testing. This can be achieved by splitting the whole dataset into training and testing sub-datasets or by using K-fold cross-validation [4]. Splitting a dataset is most of the time achieved by ran-dom sampling. The problem with the method is that a single run may select irrelevant data that influences bi-ased learning. K-fold cross-validation techniques, on the other hand, split the dataset into multiple sample groups (K), resulting in a less biased learning model. So in this research, we used 10-fold cross-validation with different. 

• Evaluation . We tested the dataset with different tra-ditional Machine Learning techniques and evaluated the performance of each. Unlike in other domains where ML is applicable, high False negative rates expose the business to higher risk than False Positive rates. In other words, a benign application detected as malicious would only cause time waste, leaving com-pany data intact. But a malicious application passed unseen will cause data/system damage, and financial loss and cost more time for recovery [11]. While most of the previous work evaluated ML models based on accuracy and False Positive rates as per equation 2 and 3, respectively, in this research, we extend the evaluation to include false negative rate metrics as per equation 4. 

𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = (𝑓 𝑝 + 𝑡𝑝 )(𝑡𝑛 + 𝑓 𝑝 + 𝑡𝑝 + 𝑓 𝑛 ) (2) 

𝐹 𝑃 𝑅 = (𝑓 𝑝 )(𝑓 𝑝 + 𝑡𝑛 ) (3) 

𝐹 𝑁𝑅 = (𝑓 𝑛 )(𝑓 𝑛 + 𝑡𝑝 ) (4) where; 

𝑓 𝑝 == number of Normal classified as Ransomware                      

> Table 7
> Performance Metrics of Various Classifiers
> Classification Accuracy FPR FNR
> RandomCommitee 99.645 0.004 0.001 RF 99.585 0.004 0.001 Rules.Part 98.874 0.011 0.010 lazy.ibk 98.519 0.015 0.015 BayesNet 98.045 0.020 0.016 Logistics 97.275 0.027 0.022

𝑓 𝑛 == number of Ransomware classified as Normal 

𝑡𝑝 == number of Ransomware classified as ransomware 

𝑡𝑛 == number of Normal classified as Normal 

## 5. Results and Discussion 

In this section, we analyse the experimental results and their contribution to advances in ransomware detection. 

Robustness . We tested the dataset with different ma-chine Learning Models. As the results show in the Table 7, Random Committee classification exhibits the best perfor-mance with 99.6% accuracy, 0% False Negative Rate (FNR) and 0. 004% False Positive Rate (FPR). This result represents the best performance achieved in our experiments, demon-strating both robustness and high efficacy. For comparison purposes, we also create models for only 1 (Lockbit2.0) and two (Lockbit2.0 & Maze) ransomware families, as has been done in [1]. In both scenarios, the accuracy achieved is 100 % accuracy. However, we caution that such models are not robust due to the limited scope of ransomware families considered. Given the large and evolv-ing number of ransomware families, we do not recommend this approach for broader applications. 

Early Detection . Early detection refers to a kind of model in which dynamic features are captured before the executed payload completes all tasks. The objective is to de-tect intrusion before it causes the most damage [5]. Different scholarly articles, such as [7], proposed methods exclusive to ransomware early detection on a host-based basis. Berrueta et al.[12] proposed a method using a threshold for early detection of ransomware based on SMB network traffic. In our dataset, the smallest ransomware data sample size is 8 for Ako and Coronavirus. So, for each ransomware family, we first created a sliding window of 8 𝑅𝑜𝐼 . That means that the first test scenario has 176(8 𝑥 22) , the second has 352(16 𝑥 22) , etc. For each test scenario, we randomly selected an equivalent benign sample from a benign dataset and then classified the data in the same way as for full detection. The window size that produces high accuracy is considered the best for early detection. As shown in Fig. 4a, the first 48 𝑅𝑜𝐼 produced 99.44 % accuracy, just 0.24 % away from full detection accuracy. Since different ransomware families have different num-bers of 𝑅𝑜𝐼 , it is obvious that the degree to which each of the families can be detected at an early stage is different. For ex-ample, Fig. 4b shows that Lockbit can be fully detected with 36 % of its execution. Only Ako, coronavirus, netwalker and   

> First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 12

A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage 

(a) Early Detection Accuracy (b) Early Detectability 

Figure 4: Comparison of early detection performance metrics 

avoslocker require completion execution as they produced quite a small number of 𝑅𝑜𝐼 s. 

Dataset and 𝐼𝑜𝐶 Repository . As part of the experi-mentation results, we created a 𝑅𝑜𝐼 dataset from 22 ran-somware families and 15 benign applications. Benign and Ransomware samples have all been collected from the same environment (testbed). Benign samples cover an extensive number of benign applications to mimic actions that a human can perform, nearly similar to what ransomware does. We found and extracted a new network-based 𝐼𝑜𝐶 that we stored in a repository for use with signature or rule-based detection techniques. 

## 6. Conclusion & Future Work 

In this paper, we present a new framework for detect-ing crypto ransomware through the application of Region of Interest (RoI) techniques to SMB network traffic. The framework operates in three distinct phases: the first two phases function in a signature-based mode, inspecting indi-vidual and aggregated packets against known Indicators of Compromise (IoCs), while the third phase employs the Ran-dom Committee Learning Model, achieving an impressive accuracy of 99.64%, with no ransomware left undetected. Furthermore, we evaluated the machine learning model for early detection and achieved a notable accuracy of 99.44%. Additionally, our study has led to the discovery of new IoCs, which can be utilised in signature- and rule-based detection systems. This contribution holds substantial sig-nificance both academically and industrially. The experi-ments were conducted on SMB3 for both encrypted and unencrypted network traffic, with the presented IoCs cor-responding to unencrypted traffic. However, each code has a counterpart for encrypted traffic. In future work, we aim to expand the analysis to include additional ransomware families and continually update our datasets. 

## References 

[1] Almashhadani, A.O., Carlin, D., Kaiiali, M., Sezer, S., 2022. Mfm-cns: a multi-feature and multi-classifier network-based system for ransomworm detection. Computers and Security 121. doi: 10 .1016/ j.cose .2022 .102860 .[2] Berrueta, E., Morato, D., Magana, E., Izal, M., 2019. A survey on detection techniques for cryptographic ransomware. IEEE Access 7, 144925–144944. doi: 10 .1109/ACCESS .2019 .2945839 .[3] Berrueta, E., Morató, D., Magaña, E., Izal, M., 2020. Open repository for the evaluation of ransomware detection tools. IEEE Access 8, 65658–65669. doi: 10 .1109/ACCESS .2020 .2984187 .[4] Brownlee, J., 2020. k-fold cross-validation. URL: https:// machinelearningmastery .com/k-fold-cross-validation/ . accessed: 9September 2025. [5] Cen, M., Jiang, F., Qin, X., Jiang, Q., Doss, R., 2024. Ransomware early detection: A survey. doi: 10 .1016/j .comnet .2023 .110138 .[6] Corporation, O., n.d. Data encapsulation and the tcp/ip protocol stack (system administration guide, volume 3). URL: 

> https://docs

.oracle .com/cd/E19455-01/806-0916/ipov-32/index .html .accessed: 7 February 2025. [7] Deng, X.Z., Cen, M.C., Jiang, M., Lu, M., 2023. Ransomware early detection using deep reinforcement learning on portable executable header. Cluster Computing doi: 10 .1007/s10586-023-04043-5 .[8] EduardoBerrueta, Morato, D., Magaña, E., Izal, M., 2022. Crypto-ransomware detection using machine learning models in file-sharing network scenarios with encrypted traffic. Expert Systems with Applications 209. doi: 10 .1016/j .eswa .2022 .118299 .[9] Fernando, D.W., Komninos, N., 2024. Fesad ransomware detection framework with machine learning using adaption to concept drift. Computers and Security 137. doi: 10 .1016/j .cose .2023 .103629 .[10] Foundation, W., n.d. Smb2/write - wireshark wiki. URL: https: //wiki .wireshark .org/SMB2/Write . accessed: 9 September 2025. [11] Maniriho, P., Mahmood, A.N., Chowdhury, M.J.M., 2022. Astudy on malicious software behaviour analysis and detection tech-niques: Taxonomy, current trends and challenges. doi: 10 .1016/ j.future .2021 .11 .030 .[12] Morato, D., Berrueta, E., Magaña, E., Izal, M., 2018. Ransomware early detection by the analysis of file sharing traffic. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 124, 14–32. doi: 10 .1016/ j.jnca .2018 .09 .013 .[13] PacketSafari, 2020. Smbv1 vs smbv2 vs smbv3: Understand-ing the differences and securing your network. URL: https:// www .packetsafari .com/blog/2020/06/09/smbv1-vs-smbv2-vs-smbv3/ . ac-cessed: 9 September 2025. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 12 A Hybrid Framework For Crypto-Ransomware Detection In Enterprise Shared Storage 

[14] University of Queensland, S.o.I.T., Engineering, E., n.d. Machine learning-based nids datasets. URL: https://staff .itee .uq .edu .au/ marius/NIDS_datasets/ . accessed: 9 September 2025. [15] Smith, R., 1990. The aids information trojan: An analysis of the pc cyborg virus. Computer Security Journal 6, 58–65. 

First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 12