Title: Federated Sovereign Transport Protocol (FSTP): Verifiable Coordination Without Disclosure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.00213v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 00:19:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Federated Sovereign Transport Protocol (FSTP): Verifiable Coordination Without Disclosure 

## Ramón Soto C. 1 and Liz Soto 21Department of Accounting, University of Sonora, Hermosillo, Sonora, Mexico , 

## ramon.soto@unison.mx 

2Department of Mathematics, University of Sonora, Hermosillo, Sonora, Mexico 

Abstract 

This paper introduces the Federated Sovereign Transport Protocol ( fstp ), a syn-chronization boundary and transport layer for federated networks in which nodes have heterogeneous privacy requirements. Existing federation protocols leave data confine-ment to operator policy: they define message formats and delivery semantics but impose no structural constraint on what a conforming server may emit. fstp addresses this gap by making data confinement a property of the protocol itself. The central mechanism is a synchronization agent whose output type set is formally closed. Raw internal data cannot appear in any federation message because the constraint is enforced by the Rust type system at compile time, not by a runtime check. Acontextual identity model derives a separate, unlinkable identifier for each federation relationship, preventing cross-context correlation structurally. A Blocklace-based event substrate [ 4, 9] provides tamper-evident, partially ordered logging with synchronization cost proportional to the symmetric difference between node states, and supports data erasure without breaking the hash chain. The result is proof without exposure : a federation participant can verify that a process occurred, that a credential is authentic, and that an outcome is uncorrupted without accessing the internal data that produced these artifacts. fstp is developed as the inter-node transport layer of Velyzor, a governance platform for institutions with demanding confidentiality requirements. The specification and reference implementation are released as open-source infrastructure under Apache 2.0; source code and figures accompany this paper. 

Keywords: federated transport; data confinement; synchronization agent; contextual identity; verifiable credentials; Blocklace; privacy by design 

1

> arXiv:2607.00213v1 [cs.CR] 30 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

## 1.1 The Gap in Existing Federation Protocols 

Federated social platforms have demonstrated that large-scale digital coordination does not require a central authority. Protocols such as ActivityPub [ 11 ] allow independently operated servers to form a coherent network while each retains administrative autonomy. This architecture rests on an implicit assumption: that all nodes are willing to expose their internal activity to the network. Messages may pass through intermediate nodes, user identities are globally resolvable, and participation is visible to any node that receives a copy of the relevant events. For many participants this exposure is acceptable. For entities operating under data protection regulations, sector-specific confidentiality obligations, or strong institutional privacy positions—trade unions, political parties, professional associations, regulated firms—it is not. These entities need to interact with a broader network while retaining exclusive custody of their internal data: membership records, deliberation histories, identity attributes, and operational information. Existing federation protocols do not address this requirement at the protocol level. They define message formats and delivery semantics; they do not constrain what a conforming server may emit, nor guarantee that internal data stays internal. Where trust in data confinement exists, it rests on operator policy rather than on protocol structure. ActivityPub provides visibility modifiers such as “unlisted” posts, but these are application-layer conventions: a conforming peer node may receive and redistribute content regardless of these markers because the protocol imposes no structural barrier to doing so. For institutional data—deliberation records, member votes, identity attributes—a convention-level restriction is insufficient; the guarantee must be structural and hold against a conforming but adversarial peer. 

## 1.2 FSTP: Confinement as a Protocol Property 

fstp addresses this gap by making data confinement a structural property of the protocol rather than a matter of operational policy. The main mechanism is a synchronization agent (sa ) that sits at the node boundary as the exclusive interface between the node’s internal data store and the federation network. The sa accepts only a formally closed set of typed cryptographic objects as output, and this constraint is enforced by the type system of the reference implementation as a compile-time guarantee, not a runtime check. 2The reference implementation is written in Rust. The confinement guarantee is realized through Rust’s enum types with exhaustive pattern matching: the compiler statically rejects any code path that attempts to place a value of an internal data type into a federation message. Section 3.1 presents the type model and an illustrative code fragment. Two additional mechanisms complete the protocol. A contextual identity model allows users to present verifiable credentials across node boundaries under relationship-specific identities that cannot be linked to their global identity or to identities in other relationships. A Blocklace substrate [ 4, 9] provides tamper-evident, partially ordered event logging whose synchronization cost is proportional to the difference between node states, and whose structure is compatible with data erasure obligations without loss of hash-chain integrity. Together these three mechanisms realize proof without exposure : a federation partici-pant can verify that a process occurred, that a credential is authentic, and that an outcome is uncorrupted—without accessing the internal data that produced these artifacts. 

## 1.3 Motivating Context 

Distributed institutions face a coordination problem that existing transport layers cannot solve. Methods for iterative group decision-making in structured social networks, such as the fuzzy aggregation approach of [ 10 ], produce collective outcomes that are certifiably legitimate precisely because they preserve the integrity of each participant’s deliberative process. That integrity depends on a transport layer capable of certifying outcomes across organizational boundaries without exposing the underlying deliberative record. fstp is designed to provide exactly this link: the hash of a certified collective decision crosses the node boundary as verifiable proof, while the deliberation that produced it remains under institutional custody. 

fstp is not a purely academic proposal. It serves as the inter-node transport layer of Velyzor, a governance platform for institutions with demanding confidentiality requirements, and is designed for operational deployability under real connectivity conditions. Data sovereignty in fstp is a structural consequence of deployment, not a feature requiring conscious activation. 

## 1.4 Paper Organization 

Section 2 presents the system model, trust assumptions, and a comparison with related approaches. Section 3 describes the three protocol primitives in detail. Section 4 discusses security and privacy properties and gives a protocol-level privacy audit. Section 5 develops a 3coordination case study and additional coordination patterns. Section 6 addresses deploy-ment considerations, regulatory compatibility, and licensing. Section 7 reports empirical synchronization benchmarks for the reference implementation. Section 8 concludes. 

# 2 System Model and Related Work 

## 2.1 Architecture and Information Partition 

Each participating institution operates a node : a server under its own administrative control, with its internal data store encrypted at rest (AES-256-GCM; key derivation via Argon2id) under institution-controlled keys. The protocol does not constrain what platform runs inside the node; it defines the boundary between what stays inside and what may leave. The reference synchronization agent is written in Rust. Conforming platform integrations may implement the same boundary contract in other languages and stacks; one production deployment uses Java 17 with Google Tink for key management and BouncyCastle for Ed25519 signing operations. Nodes participate in the federation exclusively through the synchronization agent (Figure 1). The node’s information universe is partitioned into two disjoint sets: Draw (raw internal data: membership records, deliberation content, identity attributes, operational information) and Dpub (typed cryptographic artifacts: event hashes, digital signatures, typed metadata envelopes, and verifiable credentials explicitly authorized for propagation). No element of 

Draw is derivable from any element of Dpub without breaking the underlying cryptographic primitives, so an observer with full access to all federation traffic learns nothing about the content of any internal process. 

Design Property 2.1 (Synchronization confinement) . Every message m emitted by the sa 

toward the federation satisfies 

m ∩ D raw = ∅.

## 2.2 Threat Model 

fstp addresses four adversarial capabilities. An honest-but-curious federation peer follows the protocol but attempts to infer maximal information from compliant messages. An 

honest-but-curious infrastructure operator observes traffic and storage metadata. A passive 

4FEDERATED COORDINATION LAYER Inter-Pod Coordination Space Federation Messages              

> event hashes · signatures · verifiables credentials
> PRIVACY BOUNDARY
> Raw institutional data never crosses the pod boundary
> POD A (Sovereign) Local Data ( 𝒟 raw )
> deliberations · membership · votes · internal state
> Blocklace POD B(Sovereign) Local Data ( 𝒟 raw )
> deliberations · membership · votes · internal state
> Blocklace Sync Agent B
> 𝒟 raw 𝒟 pub 𝒟 raw 𝒟 pub
> 𝓕 :𝒟 raw 𝒟 pub
> = { H(e),σ, VC }𝒟 pub
> Sync Agent A
> 𝓕 :𝒟 raw 𝒟 pub
> 𝒟 pub 𝒟 pub

Figure 1: fstp architecture. Only typed cryptographic artifacts ( Dpub ) cross the node boundary through the synchronization agent. Raw internal data ( Draw ) never enters the federation layer. 

network interceptor observes ciphertext but cannot break transport-layer encryption. A cross-context correlator attempts to link a node’s contextual identities across different federation relationships. 

fstp does not protect against malicious node administrators with authorized access to the data store, or against compromise of the underlying cryptographic primitives (SHA-256, AES-256-GCM, Ed25519). Mitigations available within the architecture for the malicious administrator case are discussed in Section 6. 

## 2.3 Comparison with Existing Approaches 

fstp ’s design sits at the intersection of four bodies of prior work, and its contribution is the integration of their relevant properties into a single transport layer that enforces confinement by design. ActivityPub [11] and Matrix [8] enable decentralized communication but lack structural constraints on data emission; confinement rests on operator policy, and both protocols allow globally resolvable user identities. The Solid project [ 1] introduces personal data pods that decouple storage from application logic, providing structural custody of data at rest; however, Solid does not define an inter-node transport layer for active federation, so its confinement guarantees do not extend to the coordination scenarios fstp targets. Blockchain-based 5governance [ 3] provides structural integrity for audit records but requires global visibility of all transaction data—the opposite of what privacy-constrained institutions need—and makes data erasure structurally impossible, as discussed in Section 3.3. The W3C standards for Verifiable Credentials [ 13 ] and Decentralized Identifiers [ 12 ]provide the identity foundation that fstp builds on. Standard self-sovereign identity ( ssi )implementations focus on individual-to-service relationships and do not address the cross-context correlation problem at the transport layer; fstp ’s contextual identity model extends their approach to the inter-node boundary. Table 1 summarizes the key dimensions along which fstp differs from the state of the art. Table 1: Comparison of federation and data-custody protocols across dimensions relevant to privacy-constrained institutions. Structural denotes a guarantee enforced by the protocol itself; Policy denotes a guarantee contingent on operator behavior; N/A denotes that the dimension is not addressed.                         

> Protocol Trust model Identity linkability Sync cost Right to erasure Content confine-ment
> ActivityPub Policy Global (re-solvable) Full fan-out N/A Policy only Matrix Policy Global (MXID) Room-scoped replication N/A Policy only Solid Structural (at rest) Per-pod N/A (storage only) Structural (at rest) Structural (at rest) Blockchain / DAO Structural Global (ad-dress) Full replica-tion Incompatible None (trans-parent)
> fstp (this work) Structural Contextual (unlinkable)
> O(∆) Structural (dangling pointer) Compile-time

# 3 Protocol Design 

fstp defines three protocol primitives: the synchronization agent, the contextual identity model, and the Blocklace event substrate. 63.1 Synchronization Agent and Data Confinement 

The synchronization agent ( sa ) is the exclusive interface between the node’s internal data store and the federation network. 

Type-system enforcement. Property 2.1 is enforced by the type system of the reference implementation, which is written in Rust. The key mechanism is a closed enumeration 

over Dpub : a Rust enum whose variants correspond exactly to the message types the sa is permitted to emit. Because Rust requires match expressions to be exhaustive, and because the internal data types ( Draw ) are not members of this enumeration and are not importable in the message module, the compiler statically rejects any code path that attempts to construct a federation message from an internal data value. Formally, let Traw be the set of Rust types representing Draw (e.g., MemberRecord ,

DeliberationEntry , IdentityAttribute ), and let Tpub be the closed enumeration repre-senting Dpub (e.g., FstpMessage::IdentityEvent , FstpMessage::VerifiableCredential ,

FstpMessage::EventHash , FstpMessage::FederationControl ). The type system enforces 

Traw ∩ Tpub = ∅ at the syntactic level: any attempt to construct a value of type FstpMessage 

from a value of any type in Traw is a type error, caught before compilation. No runtime check is required or used. Extending the output vocabulary—adding a new federation mes-sage type—requires modifying the FstpMessage enum, a change that is auditable in the open-source repository by any federation peer. The practical significance of this distinction is worth emphasizing. A runtime access control check is evaluated at execution time; it can fail due to programming errors, be bypassed by a crafted input, or produce false positives that block legitimate operation. The Rust type-system guarantee is a static property of the program: if the program compiles, the confinement property holds for all possible executions. The only way to circumvent it deliberately is to modify the source of the FstpMessage enum, which is visible and auditable. Listing 1 illustrates the enforcement. The function build_message is the only code path that produces a value of type FstpMessage ; its parameter is AuthorizedEvent , a type in 

Tpub produced by the sa ’s validation stage. A raw internal type such as MemberRecord cannot be passed to this function because the compiler rejects the call at the type-checking stage, before the program is compiled.                   

> 1// Internal data types ( D_raw ) --never cross the node boundary
> 2struct MemberRecord {name : String , joined : u64 }

73 struct DeliberationEntry { content : String , author_id : u64 } 

> 45

// Authorized staging type produced by the SA ’ s validation stage  

> 6

struct AuthorizedEvent { 

> 7

event_hash : [ u8 ; 32] , class : EventClass ,  

> 8

timestamp : u64 , cii : ContextualId , signature : Signature  

> 9

} 

> 10 11

// Closed output enumeration ( D_pub )  

> 12

enum FstpMessage { 

> 13

IdentityEvent { cii : ContextualId , pubkey : PublicKey ,  

> 14

endpoint : Url , timestamp : u64 , sig : Signature } ,  

> 15

EventHash { event : AuthorizedEvent } ,  

> 16

VerifiableCredential { subject_cii : ContextualId ,  

> 17

credential_type : String , claims : Claims ,  

> 18

issuer_cii : ContextualId , validity : Validity ,  

> 19

sig : Signature } ,  

> 20

FederationControl { control_type : ControlType ,  

> 21

from_cii : ContextualId , to_cii : ContextualId ,  

> 22

capabilities : Vec < Capability > , sig : Signature } ,  

> 23

} 

> 24 25

// The SA ’ s only outbound function accepts D_pub , not D_raw  

> 26

fn build_message ( event : AuthorizedEvent ) -> FstpMessage { 

> 27

FstpMessage :: EventHash { event } 

> 28

} 

> 29 30

// This call is a compile - time type error -- confinement is guaranteed :  

> 31

// build_message ( MemberRecord { name : " Alice ". into () , joined : 0 }) ; 

Listing 1: Simplified Rust fragment illustrating compile-time confinement. FstpMessage is the closed output type ( Dpub ); MemberRecord is a raw internal type ( Draw ). The commented call below is a type error caught at compile time, not at runtime. 8The sa transitions through five states (Figure 2): idle , validating , composing ,

transmitting , and logging . It never enters a state in which Draw values are directly marshalled to network output; both confinement violations and network failures terminate with an audit log entry before the agent resets to idle .Idle 

> Awaiting trigger

Validating 

> Check con fi nement

Composing  

> Build 𝒞 pub artifact

Transmitting 

> Send to federation

Logging 

> Write audit record

Error      

> Con fi nement violated trigger received m∩𝒟 raw ≠∅
> auth ok typed ok sent net failure reset log + reset waiting

Invariant 3.1 (Synchronization con fi nement)     

> For every message m emitted: m ∩𝒟 raw = ∅— enforced at compile time, not at runtime Normal transition Error / violation path

Figure 2: FSTP synchronization agent state machine. Normal transitions (solid lines) follow the happy path: idle → validating → composing → transmitting → logging →

idle . Error paths (dashed red) are triggered when Property 2.1 is violated or by a network failure; both terminate with an audit log entry before resetting to idle .

Base message type contract. fstp defines four base message types (Table 2). Deploying networks may extend this set with additional typed objects, provided all additions satisfy Property 2.1: 1. Identity events : contextual identifier, public key, federation endpoint. 2. Event hashes : SHA-256 hash of a certified internal event with a typed metadata envelope (event class, timestamp, aggregate attributes). No event content leaves the node. 3. Verifiable credentials : propagated only when the credential subject explicitly autho-rizes it, and scoped to the designated recipient. 94. Federation control events : typed messages that establish, update, or terminate federation relationships. Table 2: fstp synchronization agent outbound message types. All fields are elements of Dpub ;no field may carry a value of type Draw , enforcing Property 2.1 at the type-system level.              

> Type Key fields Content leaves node?
> IdentityEvent CII, pubkey, endpoint, timestamp, σNo
> EventHash event_class, timestamp, CII, aggregate_attrs,
> H(e),σ
> No
> VerifiableCredential subject_CII, credential_type, claims, is-suer_CII, validity, σ
> Consent only
> FederationControl control_type, from_CII, to_CII, capabilities,
> σ
> No

Local audit log. The sa maintains a local audit log visible to the institution’s admin-istrators. Every outbound message is recorded with its type, timestamp, destination, and reference identifier; content is never written to the log. This gives a verifiable record of all federation activity that does not depend on any external party—a mechanism relevant for regulatory compliance when credential wallets are held under platform custody. 

## 3.2 Contextual Identity Model 

Global and contextual identifiers. Each entity holds a Global Identity (gii ): apersistent Decentralized Identifier [ 12 ] that is the root of its cryptographic identity. The reference implementation uses the did:key method with Ed25519 keys, producing self-certifying identifiers that require no registry and are fully resolvable offline. The gii is not used directly in federation traffic. For each federation relationship, the sa derives a 

Contextual Identity (cii ) from the gii using a one-way function parameterized by the relationship context. The cii is stable within the relationship, but it cannot be linked to the entity’s gii or to its cii s in other contexts without the entity’s cooperation. 

Design Property 3.1 (Contextual isolation) . Let entity E participate in contexts F1, . . . , F n

with contextual identities cii Fi = f (gii E , F i), where f is a one-way function. Under the one-wayness of f , no federation participant can determine that cii Fi and cii Fj (i̸ = j) belong to the same entity without E’s cooperation. 

10 Structural prevention of context collapse. The contextual identity model is a direct structural response to the context collapse problem identified in social network research [ 7]: the unintended flattening of distinct social contexts into a single audience, causing information disclosed appropriately in one context to reach actors in a different context for whom it was not intended. In existing federated systems, a user’s global identity is resolvable across all nodes that have received any of their messages, which makes context collapse an architectural inevitability rather than an exceptional failure mode. In fstp , because each federation relationship derives an independent, unlinkable cii , no observer can determine that two contextual identities belong to the same entity without that entity’s active cooperation. This property follows from the one-wayness of the derivation function and requires no additional configuration. 

Credential wallet and minimum disclosure. Each user maintains a wallet of verifiable credentials [ 13 ]. When interacting with another node, the sa presents only the credential subset relevant to that interaction, under the user’s cii for that relationship. 

Design Property 3.2 (Minimum disclosure) . A credential presentation under fstp discloses to the destination node exactly the claims in the presented credentials and the cii under which they are presented. No additional information about the user or their home node is inferable from the presentation message. 

If the destination node accepts the presentation, the user receives residency : a contextual identity valid for the duration of their active participation in that node, which lapses when active membership falls to zero. The user’s home node retains the audit record of every credential presentation made on their behalf. 

## 3.3 Blocklace Event Substrate 

Each node stores its event history as a Blocklace [ 4, 9]: a cryptographic directed acyclic graph of signed blocks that replaces linear append-only logs. 

Definition 3.1 (Blocklace) . A Blocklace B is a set of signed blocks. Each block b ∈ B consists of: payload (b), a non-empty event sequence; parents (b), a set of hash pointers to earlier blocks; and sig (b), a digital signature over payload and parents. The frontier Fr (B) is the set of blocks with no successors in B.

Unlike a linear log, the Blocklace does not impose a total order. Concurrent events from different nodes coexist as parallel branches without forced serialization, which accurately 11 represents the temporal structure of distributed institutional decisions: fabricating precedence among genuinely concurrent decisions can carry legal or procedural significance and should be avoided. 

Synchronization efficiency. The synchronization protocol works by frontier exchange. Each of two nodes transmits its frontier Fr (B); blocks are identified by cryptographic hash, so each node determines in O(|Fr |) time which frontier blocks are locally absent, then requests those blocks and all unobserved ancestors. Because every block in the frontier of one node that is absent from the other must be transmitted, and no block that both nodes already hold need be sent, the set of blocks exchanged is exactly the symmetric difference ∆ between the two Blocklaces. Synchronization cost is therefore O(∆) , independent of total Blocklace size: a node that reconnects after an absence exchanges only the events produced during that absence, not the full history. 

Remark 3.1. The O(∆) bound describes the number of blocks transmitted as a function of the symmetric difference between node states, and is a consequence of the frontier-exchange algorithm. It characterizes protocol efficiency in terms of information exchanged, not in terms of wall-clock latency or bandwidth under specific network conditions. Empirical validation of this bound for the reference implementation is reported in Section 7. 

Tamper evidence. Modification of any block changes its hash, invalidating all hash pointers in descendant blocks. A node holding the hash of a later block can therefore detect retroactive modification of any ancestor, and a verifier can confirm the integrity of any event in the history by checking the chain from any later block it holds. 

Erasure compatibility and the dangling pointer mechanism. Events are stored in the node’s data store; the Blocklace holds hash pointers to events, not the events themselves. This structural separation between content and structure resolves an incompatibility that is architectural in linear ledger designs. In a conventional blockchain, each block contains the data of the transactions it records. Deleting data from a block changes its hash, breaking the hash pointer in the following block and cascading through the entire chain. Because integrity depends on all blocks being present and unmodified, deletion is structurally incompatible with ledger integrity: the two obligations cannot be satisfied simultaneously. Legal frameworks that impose both an immutable audit trail requirement and a right to erasure—such as the GDPR [ 2] or Mexico’s 

lfpdppp [ 6]—therefore cannot both be satisfied by a linear blockchain architecture, regardless 12 of how that architecture is configured. This is a structural limitation of linear ledgers, not a deployment problem. The Blocklace resolves this by decoupling content from structure. When an event is deleted from the data store to fulfill an erasure obligation, the corresponding block becomes a dangling pointer :

• Block b2 remains in the Blocklace with its hash H(e2), timestamp, and signature intact. 

• Content e2 is deleted from the data store and is irrecoverably absent. 

• Blocks b3 and b4 reference b2 through H(b2)—the hash of the block , not of its content. Because b2 itself is unmodified, H(b2) remains valid. 

• Tamper-evidence is preserved for all descendant blocks: a verifier holding b4 can confirm the integrity of the full chain, but cannot recover e2.The block is a pointer, not a container; deleting the pointed-to content leaves the pointer intact. The chain does not break—it simply points to something that is no longer present. This design allows an institution to satisfy a data erasure request by deleting event content from its data store while preserving the structural record that the event occurred, when it occurred, and that it has not been retroactively altered. 

Design Property 3.3 (Erasure without integrity loss) . Let b ∈ B be the block whose payload references event e. Deletion of e from the data store produces a dangling pointer at b while leaving H(b) unchanged. For all blocks b′ such that b ≤B b′, tamper-evidence is preserved: 

H(b) remains a valid ancestor reference in the hash chain. 

Whether a particular deployment thereby satisfies all applicable requirements—GDPR Article 17, Mexico’s lfpdppp , or analogous frameworks in other jurisdictions—depends on jurisdictional analysis beyond the scope of this paper. The contribution here is architectural: the structural obstacle present in linear ledgers is removed. 

# 4 Security and Privacy Properties 

## 4.1 Security Properties 

Based on the threat model of Section 2.2, fstp provides the following guarantees: 13 Before erasure request 

> Data store

e₁

> Governance event

e₂ 

> Personal data ⚠

e₃

> Governance event

e₄

> Governance event
> ⚠
> contains personal data Blocklace

b₁ 

> H(e ₁) · σ

b₂ 

> H(e ₂) · σ

b₃

> H(b ₂)·H(e ₃)· σ

b₄

> H(b ₃)·H(e ₄)· σ
> erasure request delete e ₂

After erasure 

> Data store

e₁ 

> Governance event e₂— deleted

e₃

> Governance event

e₄

> Governance event Blocklace

b₁ 

> H(e ₁) · σ

b₂  

> H(e ₂) · σ⊘

b₃

> H(b ₂)·H(e ₃)· σ

b₄

> H(b ₃)·H(e ₄)· σ

Property 3.7 — Erasure without integrity loss         

> b₂persists as a dangling pointer: H(b ₂) remains valid ⟹b₃and b ₄remain tamper-evident. Active event / valid block Dangling pointer (b ₂— block intact, content gone) Erased content (e ₂)

Figure 3: Blocklace erasure mechanism. Left : four blocks b1–b4 reference events e1–e4 in the data store; e2 contains data subject to an erasure obligation. Right : after erasure, e2

is deleted; b2 becomes a dangling pointer— H(b2) remains unchanged, so b3 and b4 remain tamper-evident. Erasure and audit trail integrity are satisfied simultaneously. 

• Data confidentiality. Node contents are encrypted at rest under institution-controlled keys. Access without administrator credentials yields only ciphertext. 

• Synchronization confinement. Property 2.1 is enforced by the Rust type system as a compile-time structural guarantee. The closed output enumeration means confinement cannot be accidentally violated; deliberate circumvention requires modifying the open-source agent code. 

• Event integrity. The Blocklace hash structure provides tamper-evidence cascading to all descendant blocks. Federation participants cannot fabricate event hashes without the issuing node’s private signing key. 

• Credential unforgeability. Verifiable credentials are signed by the issuing node’s pri-vate key and verifiable by any relying party through DID resolution, without contacting the issuer. 

• Contextual isolation. Property 3.1: contextual identities across different federation 14 relationships are unlinkable without the entity’s cooperation. 

• Minimum disclosure. Property 3.2: a credential presentation discloses exactly the presented claims and the contextual identity—nothing more. 

## 4.2 Protocol-Level Privacy Audit 

The information surface of a protocol is the set of facts that an honest-but-curious observer of conforming traffic can infer from the messages exchanged. The following audit characterizes this surface for fstp under the threat model of Section 2.2. An honest-but-curious observer of conforming fstp traffic learns : that a contextual identity is active in a specific federation relationship; that events of given classes occurred at given times with given aggregate characteristics; which contextual identities are linked within observable contexts; and that specific credential types were presented to specific destinations where authorized. The same observer cannot learn : the content of any internal event; individual participant identities in any process; individual positions within any deliberation; the mapping between contextual and global identities; the presenting user’s wallet contents beyond the presented subset; or the node’s participation in other federation relationships. 

Residual: traffic metadata. An observer may infer governance activity rhythms from event timing and frequency. This risk is real but bounded: the observer learns that governance activity occurred and when , but not what was decided or who participated—the content of the process and the identities involved remain inaccessible. For deployments where even activity rhythms are sensitive, randomized announcement delays are compatible with fstp 

because the Blocklace relies on partial ordering rather than wall-clock synchronization, so delays do not affect correctness. Formal quantification of information leakage from traffic patterns under a specified adversary model is left for future work. 

## 4.3 Regulatory Compatibility 

Property 3.3 is designed to enable simultaneous satisfaction of audit trail integrity requirements and data erasure obligations. The dangling pointer mechanism decouples content deletion from hash-chain integrity: content deletion addresses erasure requirements; the persisting hash record satisfies integrity requirements. This resolution applies regardless of the specific 15 legal framework in force, because it rests on the structural properties of the Blocklace rather than on any jurisdiction-specific configuration. As noted in Section 3.3, whether a particular deployment achieves full compliance with GDPR Article 17, Mexico’s lfpdppp , or analogous frameworks in other jurisdictions requires jurisdictional analysis beyond the scope of this paper. Property 3.2 aligns with data minimization principles present in contemporary data protection frameworks across jurisdictions. When wallets are held under platform custody, the audit log of every credential presentation provides the accountability record that such frameworks typically require. 

# 5 Coordination Scenarios 

The following scenarios demonstrate how the three protocol primitives compose under different coordination requirements. They are deliberately generic— fstp is a transport protocol and the institutions that deploy it vary in sector, size, and legal context. What they share is the need to coordinate across node boundaries while retaining exclusive custody of internal data. 

## 5.1 Case Study: Federated Decision Across Sovereign Nodes 

This case study develops a complete protocol trace for a three-institution governance scenario. It is chosen because it exercises all three protocol primitives simultaneously and illustrates the governance accountability question: how can an external auditor verify the legitimacy of a collective outcome without accessing the deliberative record of any participating institution? 

Structure. Three institutions— A, B, and an aggregation node C—must jointly produce a certified collective decision. Institutions A and B each conduct an internal deliberation and vote independently. The outcome of each institution’s process must remain inaccessible to the other institution and to C; what the network requires is verifiable proof that each institution completed a legitimate process and produced a certified outcome. 

Threat context. Nodes A and B are honest-but-curious peers, each attempting to infer the other’s internal process from federation traffic. Node C is an honest-but-curious aggregation node attempting to infer participation patterns from the event hashes it receives. A subsequent external audit requires the auditor to verify the legitimacy of the collective outcome without 16 receiving the deliberative record of any institution. 

Protocol trace. 

1. Federation link establishment. Nodes A, B, and C exchange FederationControl 

messages to establish mutually authenticated channels. Each node publishes its CII and public key via IdentityEvent . No internal data is exchanged in this phase. 2. Internal deliberation (nodes A and B, in parallel). Each institution conducts its deliberation entirely within its own node. The deliberation content—agenda, contribu-tions, votes—is of type Draw and does not leave either node at any stage. 3. Event hash emission. Upon certification of its internal decision, each sa constructs an EventHash envelope: 

⟨ H(ei), class:decision , ts i, σ i ⟩,

where H(ei) is the SHA-256 hash of the certified event and σi is computed over the envelope using the node’s Ed25519 signing key. No event content appears in the envelope. The two envelopes are transmitted to C over mutually authenticated fstp channels. 4. Aggregation at node C. Node C verifies the signatures σA and σB and the typed metadata (event class decision , timestamps within the protocol window). It does not—and does not need to—verify the content of either institution’s deliberation. Node 

C applies the network’s aggregation rule to (H(eA), H (eB )) and records the collective outcome in its Blocklace. The two input hashes appear as parallel branches, preserving the genuine concurrency of the institutional decisions without imposing an artificial ordering. 5. External audit. An external authority requests proof of the legitimacy of institution 

A’s contribution. Institution A discloses its full internal deliberation record directly to the authority. The authority computes H(eA) from the disclosed record and compares it against the EventHash already present in node C’s Blocklace. A match provides cryp-tographic proof that the disclosed record is authentic, that it was produced before the collective outcome was recorded, and that it has not been retroactively altered—without requiring the authority to contact node C, node B, or any other party. Institution B’s deliberation is not disclosed in this process. This trace shows the central accountability property of fstp . The auditor can verify 17 the legitimacy of the collective outcome with the same cryptographic confidence as if they had observed the deliberation in real time, without accessing the deliberation during the governance process itself. The Blocklace record is the independently verifiable anchor; the institution’s local record is the evidence; the hash is the link between them. A centralized audit architecture cannot provide this property because the auditor must trust that a central operator has not modified the record; in fstp , the auditor trusts the hash function and the public key infrastructure, both of which are verifiable without relying on any party’s honesty. Throughout the trace, Property 2.1 holds: the only values crossing any node boundary are elements of Dpub . The deliberation content eA and eB are elements of Draw and remain at their respective nodes at all times. 

## 5.2 Additional Coordination Patterns 

User crossing a node boundary. A user on a shared platform node joins a group on a privately operated node. The sa derives a cii for the relationship and presents only the wallet credentials relevant to the group’s access policy. The destination node grants residency under the user’s cii ; interaction proceeds through the sa . Neither node’s data store is exposed to the other. When the user leaves, the destination node retains only the cii and the presented credentials—it learns nothing about the user’s home node, global identity, or other federation relationships. The home node retains the audit record of every credential presentation made on the user’s behalf, satisfying the accountability requirement of Property 3.2 in its bilateral form. 

Verifiable credential network. A certification authority issues signed credentials to member organizations. Holders present credentials to relying parties under their contextual identity for that relationship. The relying party verifies by DID resolution—without con-tacting the issuer—which means the issuer is not informed of individual presentations and cannot construct a usage profile across relying parties. Revocation propagates through the federation via DID document update. The holder’s wallet log records every presentation. This arrangement applies Property 3.2 in its hub-and-spoke form: the issuing node certifies once, relying parties verify independently, and the holder controls disclosure. 18 5.3 Summary 

Three structurally distinct patterns—bilateral user-to-node, multilateral inter-institutional, hub-and-spoke credential network—are handled by the same three protocol primitives without modification. The same sa confinement property, the same contextual identity model, and the same Blocklace substrate compose differently for each pattern. This composability is the primary empirical claim of the scenarios: fstp is general with respect to the coordination structures that privacy-constrained institutions encounter in practice. 

# 6 Deployment Considerations 

Trust localization. fstp does not eliminate trust requirements; it localizes them to the institutional administrative domain. The risk of data exfiltration by a local administrator is intrinsic to any sovereign custody model and is not resolved by the protocol alone. Four mitigations are available within the architecture: the open-source sa code is auditable before deployment; the local audit log makes all outbound federation activity inspectable by the institution’s own administrators; the sa software version can be declared in the node’s DID document, allowing federation peers to verify a conforming implementation before establishing a trust relationship; and the node’s institutional DID can be protected by an 

M -of-N key recovery scheme in which a quorum of designated administrators must cooperate to authorize DID rotation, preventing a single administrator from unilaterally changing the node’s cryptographic identity. Full mitigation of the malicious administrator threat would require trusted execution environments (TEEs), which are architecturally compatible with 

fstp but outside the current specification. 

Reference deployment modes. The reference synchronization agent is a lightweight process that implements the fstp boundary. Deployments may adopt it in three common modes: embedded (bundled with a local administrator application, requiring no additional infrastructure); server service (running as a system service on organization-owned hardware, enabling continuous synchronization independent of whether a desktop client is open); and 

container (packaged as an OCI image for organizations with existing container infrastructure). In all three modes the agent is the exclusive process with outbound network access; its traffic log is exposed locally and is auditable by the organization’s own technical staff and by external auditors without relying on any federation operator or platform vendor. The data store in all modes is encrypted at rest with AES-256-GCM; the encryption key is derived 19 from the administrator’s passphrase via Argon2id. The private key of the institutional DID is never transmitted; all signing operations requiring it are performed locally. One production integration ships this agent alongside Velyzor, a governance platform for institutions with demanding confidentiality requirements; the protocol boundary is identical regardless of the enclosing application. 

Extensibility. The base message type contract is extensible. Deploying networks may define additional typed objects—such as domain-specific governance primitives—provided all additions satisfy Property 2.1. The protocol defines the confinement boundary and the extensibility contract; it does not fix the application-layer vocabulary. 

Scalability and hierarchical federation topologies. The O(∆) per-pair synchronization cost assumes a flat topology in which every node synchronizes directly with every peer. Observations of existing federated networks suggest that activity in practice concentrates on a small number of high-traffic nodes, a pattern consistent with power-law degree distributions documented in the Fediverse [ 5]. In such environments, a small set of nodes accumulates large |∆| values relative to the rest, creating a load imbalance that flat synchronization does not address. 

fstp ’s Blocklace substrate is natively compatible with hierarchical federation topologies, in which each node synchronizes directly with a designated subset of peers. In a two-level hierarchy, leaf nodes synchronize only with their assigned aggregation node, incurring O(∆ local )

cost where ∆local reflects only events relevant to their subtree. Aggregation nodes bear the cross-subtree synchronization cost and can be provisioned accordingly. Property 2.1 applies at every level of the hierarchy: no raw internal data crosses any node boundary regardless of hierarchy depth. A practical consequence is that institutions with intermittent connectivity or limited server capacity can join the federation as leaf nodes, synchronizing with a single peer on their own schedule. Formal analysis of optimal hierarchy construction and empirical benchmarking of synchronization performance under realistic network conditions are left for future work. 

Structural compliance. Data sovereignty in fstp is not a configuration option but a structural consequence of deployment. An institution that deploys a conforming node for local operational reasons—compliance documentation, credential issuance, internal governance records— acquires data sovereignty as an architectural byproduct. The protocol does not require an explicit commitment to decentralization as a precondition for benefiting from the 20 confinement guarantee. 

Open-source release and license. The fstp specification and the reference imple-mentation of the synchronization agent are released as open infrastructure. The reference implementation is published under the Apache 2.0 License, which permits free use, mod-ification, and distribution including in commercial and proprietary products, subject to attribution. The protocol specification is published under CC BY 4.0. The choice of Apache 2.0 is not incidental to the security argument. The paper establishes that deliberate circumvention of Property 2.1 requires a modification to the FstpMessage 

enum that is auditable in the open-source repository by any federation peer before establishing a trust relationship . That argument requires that any peer actually has the legal right to inspect, compile, and verify the code at any time—not merely to read it. Apache 2.0 provides this right unconditionally. A source-available license with a commercial protection period, such as the Business Source License, would leave the security claim incomplete for the duration of that period, because the right to verify would be restricted to reading rather than to the full audit cycle of inspect, compile, and run. Institutions that integrate fstp 

into proprietary governance platforms retain full freedom to do so; Apache 2.0 imposes no copyleft obligations. 

# 7 Empirical Synchronization Performance 

Remark 3.1 characterizes the O(∆) cost of the frontier-exchange algorithm in terms of blocks transmitted. This section reports controlled microbenchmarks that validate this bound empirically for the reference implementation and quantify the throughput of both the emission and reception sides of a synchronization round. 

## 7.1 Methodology 

Benchmarks were executed with Criterion.rs (v0.5), which collects 100 samples per configura-tion, applies outlier filtering, and reports two-sided confidence intervals at the 95% level. All measurements were taken on a single machine; inter-node network latency is explicitly out of scope and identified as a direction for future work (Section 6). Each experiment instantiates a pair of InMemoryBlocklace nodes (BA, BB ) sharing a common history of N blocks, after which BA diverges by appending ∆ additional blocks that 21 BB does not hold. The two experimental parameters are varied independently: 

• Experiment 1 fixes N = 1 ,000 and varies ∆ ∈ { 10 , 50 , 100 , 200 , 500 }, measuring the cost of sync_delta as a function of the symmetric difference alone. 

• Experiment 2 fixes ∆ = 50 and varies N ∈ { 100 , 500 , 1,000 , 5,000 }, measuring whether the cost of sync_delta depends on the shared history size. 

• Experiment 3 fixes N = 1 ,000 and varies ∆ ∈ { 10 , 50 , 100 , 200 }, measuring the cost of 

merge_blocks (block reception and integration) using iter_batched to isolate setup from measurement. Setup cost (blocklace construction) is excluded from all timing loops. Experiment 3 uses 

iter_batched so that allocating a fresh receiver instance is not counted toward merge_blocks 

time. 

## 7.2 Results 

Experiment 1: emission cost scales linearly with ∆. Table 3 reports median wall-clock time and throughput for sync_delta as ∆ grows from 10 to 500 blocks, with N = 1 ,000 held constant. Table 3: Emission cost ( sync_delta ) as a function of ∆, with shared history N = 1 ,000 

blocks fixed. Throughput is reported in elements per second; confidence intervals are at the 95% level.                   

> ∆(blocks) Median time Throughput 10 5.8 μs1.72 Melem/s 50 21.2 μs2.36 Melem/s 100 40.6 μs2.46 Melem/s 200 79.0 μs2.53 Melem/s 500 221.3 μs2.26 Melem/s

Wall-clock time scales proportionally with ∆: a tenfold increase in ∆ (from 50 to 500 blocks) produces a tenfold increase in elapsed time ( 21 .2 μs to 221 .3 μs ). Throughput remains stable at approximately 2.3 Melem/s across all configurations, confirming that the per-block cost is constant and that the algorithm is O(∆) in practice, not merely in the asymptotic analysis. 22 Experiment 2: emission cost is independent of N . Table 4 reports sync_delta time as N grows from 100 to 5,000 blocks with ∆ = 50 fixed. Table 4: Emission cost ( sync_delta ) as a function of shared history size N , with ∆ = 50 

blocks fixed.                

> N(shared blocks) Median time Throughput 100 20.5 μs2.44 Melem/s 500 20.6 μs2.42 Melem/s 1,000 21.9 μs2.28 Melem/s 5,000 21.2 μs2.36 Melem/s

Median time is statistically indistinguishable across a 50-fold increase in N (all pairwise comparisons yield p > 0.05 under Criterion’s Welch t-test). This confirms the central efficiency claim of Section 3.3: the set of blocks that must be transmitted is determined by ∆, the symmetric difference between node states, and the size of the shared history imposes no additional cost on the emitting side. 

Experiment 3: reception cost after implementation fix. The initial merge_blocks 

implementation rebuilt the entire frontier cache after each merge, incurring O(N ) cost regardless of ∆. This was identified as an implementation deficiency relative to the O(∆) 

protocol claim: at ∆ = 10 over a shared history of N = 1 ,000 blocks, merge_blocks took 

≈5.2 ms—three orders of magnitude slower than the corresponding sync_delta call at 5.5 μs. The frontier cache is now updated incrementally: only the parents of newly merged blocks are removed from the frontier set, and only the new block hashes are inserted, preserving the 

O(∆) invariant on the receiving side. Table 5 reports post-fix results. Table 5: Reception cost ( merge_blocks ) as a function of ∆, with N = 1 ,000 fixed. Timing excludes receiver setup ( iter_batched ). The previous implementation incurred ≈5–6 ms for all ∆ due to full frontier cache reconstruction; the incremental fix reduces cost by 91–98%.                     

> ∆(blocks) Median time Throughput Reduction vs. prior 10 77 μs129 Kelem/s ≈98%
> 50 169 μs296 Kelem/s ≈97%
> 100 284 μs352 Kelem/s ≈95%
> 200 526 μs380 Kelem/s ≈91%

Reception time now grows proportionally with ∆. The remaining gap between emis-sion and reception throughput ( ≈2.3 Melem/s vs. ≈290 –380 Kelem/s) reflects legitimate additional work on the receiving side: each block undergoes cryptographic hash verification 23 (compute_hash ) and insertion into the backing HashMap , operations absent from the read-only 

sync_delta path. Both sides of a synchronization round are therefore O(∆) in the reference implementation. 

## 7.3 Summary 

Three experimental results jointly support the O(∆) claim of Section 3.3: 1. Emission time scales linearly with ∆ at constant throughput ( ≈2.3 Melem/s), confirming 

O(∆) on the sending side. 2. Emission time is insensitive to N over a 50-fold range, confirming that shared history imposes no overhead on the frontier-exchange computation. 3. Reception time, after an incremental frontier-cache update, also scales linearly with 

∆, with throughput growing from 129 to 380 Kelem/s as block-level hash verification dominates at larger ∆.0100 200 300 500 Median time (μs) 10 50 100 200 500   

> Δ(blocks in symmetric difference) sync_delta — emission (N = 1000 fixed) sync_delta — N independence ( Δ= 50, time ×10) merge_blocks — reception (N = 1000 fixed)

Figure 4: Empirical validation of the O(∆) synchronization claim. Emission ( sync _delta )scales with the symmetric difference ∆ and remains insensitive to shared history size N ;reception ( merge _blocks ) also scales linearly with ∆ after the incremental frontier-cache fix. These results characterize the reference implementation under synthetic load with sequen-tial block histories. Benchmarking under realistic conditions—concurrent writers, branching DAG topologies, and intermittent connectivity—is left for future work. 24 8 Conclusions 

This paper has presented fstp , a transport and synchronization boundary protocol for federated networks in which nodes have heterogeneous privacy requirements. Three protocol primitives form a coherent confinement architecture. The synchronization agent enforces Property 2.1—no raw internal data in any federation message—as a compile-time structural guarantee implemented through Rust’s exhaustive enum pattern matching. The 

contextual identity model provides unlinkable per-relationship identities and minimum-disclosure credential presentation (Properties 3.1 and 3.2), structurally preventing cross-context correlation and context collapse. The Blocklace substrate delivers tamper-evident, partially ordered, erasure-compatible event logging whose synchronization cost is proportional to the difference between node states (Property 3.3). The comparison in Section 2.3 establishes that existing federation protocols address subsets of these properties but none addresses all four simultaneously at the protocol level. The privacy audit of Section 4.2 characterizes the information surface: an honest-but-curious observer learns that events occurred, when, and with what aggregate characteristics, but cannot learn event content, individual participant identities, or cross-context identity links. The case study of Section 5.1 shows that an external auditor can verify the legitimacy of a collective governance outcome with cryptographic confidence, without accessing the deliberative record of any participating institution. This asymmetry is the protocol’s central property: proof without exposure .

fstp specifies a transport boundary that conforming platforms may adopt independently of any single vendor. The protocol specification and reference implementation of the synchro-nization agent are available as open infrastructure under Apache 2.0. Future work includes empirical benchmarking under realistic network conditions with intermittent connectivity, formal quantification of traffic-metadata leakage under a specified adversary model, and analysis of optimal hierarchical federation topology construction. 

Data availability. The fstp reference implementation ( fstp-core , reference synchroniza-tion agent) and the protocol specification are published under Apache 2.0 and CC BY 4.0, respectively. Benchmarks in Section 7 can be reproduced with cargo bench -p fstp-core 

on the tagged release cited in this paper. 25 References 

[1] Berners-Lee, T., et al. (2016). Solid: A platform for decentralized social applications based on linked data. Technical report, MIT CSAIL. [2] European Parliament and Council. (2016). Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation). Official Journal of the European Union , L 119, pp. 1–88. [3] Hassan, S., and De Filippi, P. (2021). Decentralized autonomous organization. Internet Policy Review , 10(2). [4] Keidar, I., et al. (2023). Cordial miners: Fast optimistic BFT consensus. 

arXiv:2205.09174 .[5] La Morgia, M., et al. (2021). Understanding the Mastodon social network. 

arXiv:2101.01360 .[6] Congreso de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. (2010). Ley Federal de Protección de Datos Personales en Posesión de los Particulares. Diario Oficial de la Federación , 5 de julio de 2010. [7] Marwick, A. E., and Boyd, D. (2011). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media & Society , 13(1), pp. 114–133. [8] The Matrix.org Foundation. (2022). Matrix specification. https://spec.matrix.org/ 

[9] Shapiro, E. (2023). Grassroots distributed systems: Concept, examples, implementation and applications. arXiv:2301.04391 . Presented at DISC 2023. [10] Soto R., R., Robles-Baldenegro, M. E., López, V., and Camalich, J. A. (2016). MQDM: An iterative fuzzy method for group decision making in structured social networks. 

International Journal of Intelligent Systems , Wiley. DOI: 10.1002/int.21826 [11] W3C. (2018). ActivityPub. W3C Recommendation. https://www.w3.org/TR/ activitypub/ 

[12] W3C. (2022). Decentralized identifiers (DIDs) v1.0. W3C Recommendation. https: //www.w3.org/TR/did-core/ 

[13] W3C. (2022). Verifiable credentials data model v1.1. W3C Recommendation. https: //www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/ 

26