Title: ToolGuardian: Declarative Security for AI Agent-Tool Interactions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.21835v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:13:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# ToolGuardian: Declarative Security for AI Agent-Tool Interactions 

Arun Ravindran 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of North Carolina at Charlotte 

Charlotte, NC arun.ravindran@charlotte.edu 

Saurabh Deochake 

SentinelOne 

Mountain View, CA saurabh.deochake@sentinelone.com 

Abstract —LLM agents increasingly rely on external tools to read files, call APIs, execute commands, and modify external services. This expands agent capability but introduces a new security boundary: third-party tools may appear benign at the interface level while embedding unsafe behavior in their implementations. Existing defenses are limited by weak evidence from tool metadata, scanner-style designs that collapse charac-terization and policy judgment into a single pre-use decision, and heuristic or LLM-based enforcement that may lack deterministic, auditable reasoning over task context and multi-tool composition. This paper presents ToolGuardian, a policy-driven frame-work for securing agent-tool interactions through pre-admission vetting and task-aware runtime authorization. ToolGuardian uses progressive characterization to convert increasingly rich evidence into structured facts: descriptions capture declared intent, system-call traces expose coarse behavior, mock execution reveals observed effects, and source analysis identifies latent or conditional behavior. These facts describe capabilities, data access, communication, state mutation, provenance, and declared-versus-observed mismatches. ToolGuardian’s core contribution is an Answer Set Programming (ASP)-based declarative policy layer that reasons explicitly over capabilities, effects, task context, and composition. We compare ASP against heuristic and LLM-based policy realizations using the same inputs and output contract. We evaluate ToolGuardian on 16 MCP-style tools, including 8 malicious variants derived from real open-source tools, and 20 runtime scenarios covering atomic and composite workflows. For vetting, ASP reaches deny-class F1 of 0.86 and 88% accuracy us-ing description, syscall, and observed-effect evidence. For runtime authorization, fully specified realizations classify all scenarios correctly, while ablations show that removing compositional and conformance rules substantially degrades performance. 

Index Terms —security, AI, ASP, logic programming, tools 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

LLM AI agents increasingly act through external tools rather than text generation alone. Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers and related tool interfaces [1] allow AI agents to read files, query databases, call web APIs, execute com-mands, and modify remote services. This shift makes AI agents more useful, but it also changes the security boundary: a third-party tool is no longer passive context for the model, but executable code that may act with delegated authority inside an AI agent workflow. Recent work such as MalTool has shown that malicious AI agent tools can preserve benign-looking interfaces while embedding code-level behaviors that violate confidentiality, integrity, or availability [2]. This threat is difficult to address with descriptions or registry trust alone because malicious variants may leave user-facing descriptions unchanged while hiding behavior in implementation logic. It is also not suffi-cient to treat tool security as a one-time classification problem. A tool may be acceptable for one task and unsafe for another, and individually plausible actions may become unsafe when composed across a multi-step workflow. Existing defenses leave three gaps. First, lightweight meta-data and tool descriptions provide limited evidence about implementation behavior. Second, scanner-style detection of-ten combines evidence extraction and policy judgment into a single decision, making it difficult to study how additional be-havioral evidence changes the security–utility tradeoff. Third, many enforcement mechanisms focus on either pre-use detec-tion or runtime tool-call control, but AI agent-tool security requires both: tools should be vetted before admission, and individual invocations should be authorized in task context. This paper presents ToolGuardian, a policy-driven frame-work for securing AI agent-tool interactions. ToolGuardian separates tool characterization from policy enforcement and uses a progressively layered characterization strategy: low-cost descriptions provide declared intent, system-call traces expose coarse operational capabilities, mock execution reveals observed effects, and source-level analysis identifies latent or conditional behavior. Each layer is more expensive to obtain but provides richer security evidence. ToolGuardian normal-izes this evidence into structured facts about capabilities, data access, communication behavior, state mutation, provenance, and declared-versus-observed mismatches. The policy layer then evaluates these facts at two enforcement stages: pre-admission vetting and task-aware runtime authorization. The central contribution of ToolGuardian is an ASP-based declarative policy layer for AI agent-tool security. To the best of our knowledge, ToolGuardian is the first framework to apply Answer Set Programming to the problem of securing LLM AI agent-tool interactions across both pre-admission vetting and task-aware runtime authorization. The ASP realization encodes deny conditions, exceptions, effect-conformance checks, and compositional constraints as explicit rules over structured characterization facts. This makes enforcement deterministic arXiv:2607.21835v1 [cs.CR] 23 Jul 2026 and auditable, while supporting reasoning over interactions among tool capabilities, observed effects, task context, and multi-step workflows. We compare this ASP realization against two practical alternatives. The heuristic realization serves as a conventional imperative baseline, where policy logic is encoded through risk scores, thresholds, and hand-written authorization checks. The LLM realization represents a popular emerging approach in which a reasoning-capable model interprets structured facts and policy instructions to produce security decisions. All three realizations operate over the same inputs and output contract, allowing us to isolate the effect of the policy realization itself. We evaluate ToolGuardian along two separate enforcement dimensions: tool vetting and runtime authorization. Vetting asks whether a tool should be admitted before use, independent of any particular task. Runtime authorization asks a different question: whether a specific invocation is permitted in the current task context. This distinction is important because the same capability can be benign in one task and unsafe in another; for example, network access may be appropriate for a weather query but unsafe after sensitive local data has been accessed. Our evaluation uses a controlled corpus of 16 MCP-style tools, consisting of 8 benign tools and 8 malicious variants derived from real open-source MCP implementations. The malicious variants preserve the external functionality and user-facing descriptions of the original benign tools while em-bedding malicious behavior. For vetting, the ASP realization reaches its best performance using description, syscall, and observed-effect evidence, corresponding to characterization tier P2, with deny-class F1 of 0.86 and 88% accuracy. Adding source-analysis evidence at P3 exposes additional high-risk behavior, but also increases overblocking of benign high-capability tools. For runtime authorization, we evaluate 20 task-specific sce-narios using the richest characterization tier. These scenarios include both atomic invocations, where a single tool action is checked against the task profile, and composite work-flows, where individually plausible actions become unsafe in combination. Composite workflows are important because agentic systems often solve tasks through multi-step tool use: sensitive-data access followed by network egress, credential access followed by external communication, or destructive effects propagated across tools can create risks not visible from any single invocation alone. All three fully specified realizations correctly classify all 20 runtime scenarios, while ablations show that removing explicit compositional and con-formance rules substantially reduces performance. These re-sults show that structured characterization improves policy visibility, but accurate enforcement also requires task-aware and composition-aware policy reasoning. This paper makes the following contributions: 1) We define ToolGuardian, an enforcement architecture for AI agent-tool security that separates pre-admission vetting from task-aware runtime authorization. 2) We introduce a progressive characterization pipeline that converts increasingly rich evidence including descrip-tions, traces, observed effects, and source analysis into structured policy facts. 3) We present, to the best of our knowledge, the first ASP-based declarative policy framework for securing LLM AI agent-tool interactions, with explicit reasoning over capabilities, effects, task context, and multi-tool composition. 4) We compare ASP against two practical alternatives — an imperative heuristic baseline and an LLM-based policy interpreter, under the same inputs, output contract, and evaluation scenarios. 5) We evaluate ToolGuardian on 16 MCP-style tools and 20 runtime scenarios, showing how characterization depth, partial interventions, and composition-aware runtime policies affect security and utility. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related work, and provides background on Answer Set Programming. Section III defines the threat model. Sec-tion IV presents the ToolGuardian architecture. Sections V and VI describe tool characterization and policy enforcement. Sections VII and VIII present the evaluation setup and results. Sections IX and X discuss implications, limitations, and future work. Section XI concludes the paper. II. B ACKGROUND 

A. Related Work on AI Agent-Tool Security 

Recent work has shown that malicious tools can pre-serve benign-looking interfaces while embedding harmful im-plementation behavior. MalTool demonstrates that malicious MCP-style tools can perform confidentiality, integrity, and availability attacks while remaining difficult to distinguish from benign tools using descriptions alone [2]. Related work on malicious agent skills shows that third-party agent ex-tensions can contain credential theft, decision hijacking, and undocumented capabilities [3]. These studies motivate de-fenses that reason about tool behavior rather than relying only on user-facing descriptions, registry trust, or installation-time approval [4], [5], [6]. A complementary line of work studies attacks on the agent’s tool-selection process. Tool-selection and prompt-injection at-tacks manipulate tool descriptions, documents, or retrieval pipelines so that an agent selects an attacker-controlled tool for a target task [7]. Benchmarks for indirect prompt injection in tool-integrated agents confirm that such attacks are practical and widespread [8]. These attacks increase the likelihood that a malicious tool is invoked, while code-level malicious behavior determines what happens after invocation. Several emerging defenses attempt to detect unsafe tools before use. These include MCP scanners, static-analysis tools, dependency inspection, rule-based checks, conventional mal-ware and program-analysis tools, and LLM-based semantic vetting [9], [10]. MalTool evaluates several such detectors and finds that existing methods struggle to reliably distinguish malicious and benign tools [2]. Other work focuses on runtime protection, constraining what agents may do at the tool-call boundary through privilege-control policies, task alignment, causal attribution, or prompt-injection defenses [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Together, these works establish that agent-tool security requires both pre-admission vetting and runtime authorization. ToolGuardian differs from this prior work in both en-forcement target and policy mechanism. Rather than focusing only on malicious-tool generation, tool-selection manipula-tion, pre-use scanning, or runtime prompt-injection defense, ToolGuardian treats agent-tool security as a two-stage policy problem: tools are first vetted before admission, and individual invocations are later authorized in task context. It also sep-arates characterization from enforcement, allowing the same structured evidence to be evaluated by different policy realiza-tions. This design builds on classical ideas from declarative access control, capability security, information-flow control, and logic-based policy specification [16], [17], [18], which separate policy intent from enforcement logic and make autho-rization decisions inspectable. ToolGuardian applies this style of reasoning to LLM agent-tool ecosystems through an ASP-based declarative policy layer, enabling explicit reasoning over tool provenance, characterized capabilities, observed effects, declared-versus-observed mismatches, task permissions, and multi-tool composition. 

B. Answer Set Programming 

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a declarative logic-programming paradigm used for solving combinatorial reason-ing problems under explicit constraints [19]. An ASP program consists of logical rules over facts, and solutions are computed as stable models, also called answer sets. Unlike imperative implementations, ASP separates policy specification from ex-ecution strategy: the developer specifies what conditions must hold, while the solver determines which conclusions follow from the rules. ASP is well suited for security-policy reasoning because it naturally expresses deny conditions, exceptions, dependencies, and multi-condition constraints. A rule may derive a violation only when several conditions simultaneously hold, making ASP useful for modeling interactions among capabilities, effects, task permissions, and workflow composition. The examples below illustrate the basic ASP syntax used throughout this paper.  

> tool(mcp_exec). capability(mcp_exec, shell_exec). network_access(mcp_exec).

Rules derive conclusions from combinations of facts:   

> deny(Tool) :-capability(Tool, shell_exec), network_access(Tool).

The rule above states that a tool should be denied if it com-bines shell execution with network access. ASP rules can also encode exceptions, task-aware constraints, and compositional reasoning across multiple invocations. ToolGuardian uses ASP to encode declarative security poli-cies for both pre-admission vetting and runtime authorization. Policy decisions are derived through logical inference over structured characterization facts and task constraints, produc-ing deterministic and auditable outputs. III. T HREAT MODEL 

We consider agentic AI systems in which LLM agents invoke external tools through structured interfaces such as API wrappers, plugin frameworks, or Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers. These tools may be obtained from public repositories, third-party developers, or modified versions of otherwise benign tools, and may receive operational capabil-ities such as filesystem access, network communication, sub-process execution, browser automation, or access to external services. 

A. Adversary Capabilities 

We assume the adversary controls the implementation of one or more tools available to the agent. The adversarial tool may expose a benign-looking interface while embedding hidden behavior in its implementation. Such behavior may be triggered by particular inputs, execution contexts, environment variables, or multi-step agent workflows. The tool may also provide incomplete or misleading descriptions of its intended behavior. The adversary’s goal is to misuse the capabilities delegated to the tool in order to violate confidentiality, integrity, or availability properties of the agent environment. This includes reading or transmitting sensitive data, modifying local or remote state beyond the user’s intent, retrieving or executing untrusted code, or consuming resources in a way that degrades agent operation. The adversary may also exploit composition across tools, where one tool provides access to sensitive local resources and another provides an external communication channel. We do not assume that the adversary compromises the operating system kernel, hypervisor, hardware platform, LLM model weights, model serving infrastructure, or Tool-Guardian’s trusted enforcement components. We assume that policy evaluation and runtime mediation execute correctly and cannot be tampered with by external tools. Indirect prompt injection attacks through external data sources, such as those demonstrated against real-world LLM-integrated ap-plications [20], are covered by the adversary capabilities described above. 

B. In-Scope Attacks 

ToolGuardian is designed to defend against unsafe tool admission and unsafe runtime invocation in agentic AI work-flows. Table I summarizes the attack classes considered in scope. 

C. Out-of-Scope Threats 

Threats outside the tool invocation and enforcement bound-ary are out of scope. These include direct compromise of Fig. 1: ToolGuardian architecture illustrating layered tool characterization, structured fact generation, policy evaluation, and enforcement. Tools are analyzed using progressively richer characterization techniques, producing structured facts evaluated by ASP, heuristic, and LLM-based policy realizations. The framework supports both pre-admission vetting and task-aware runtime enforcement for agentic AI tool ecosystems. TABLE I: In-scope attack classes for ToolGuardian.        

> Security property In-scope behavior
> Confidentiality Accessing, persisting, or exfiltrating prompts, files, credentials, agent memory, execution traces, or other sensitive runtime data. Integrity Modifying local files, databases, agent memory, or external services beyond the intended tool action; retrieving or executing untrusted remote code. Availability Consuming CPU, GPU, storage, network, or ex-ecution time in ways that degrade or block agent operation; destructive local behavior that prevents normal use. Composition Unsafe multi-tool workflows, such as sensitive local access followed by network egress, creden-tial access followed by external service use, or destructive actions propagated across tools.

the kernel, hypervisor, hardware, LLM model weights, model serving stack, or ToolGuardian enforcement infrastructure. Side-channel and microarchitectural attacks are also out of scope because they are not observable through the characteri-zation and runtime-monitoring mechanisms considered here. ToolGuardian does not attempt to prove arbitrary tool cor-rectness or guarantee the absence of all malicious function-ality. Prompt-injection attacks are out of scope unless they result in unsafe external tool behavior. Behaviors that remain unobservable under the available characterization or runtime monitoring infrastructure may evade detection; this limitation motivates the layered characterization strategy evaluated in this work. IV. T OOL GUARDIAN OVERVIEW 

ToolGuardian is a policy-driven security framework for controlling tool admission and runtime invocation in agentic AI systems. It operates between the LLM agent and external tools, deciding both whether a tool should be admitted into the execution environment and whether a specific tool invocation should be allowed during a task. Figure 1 presents the overall architecture. ToolGuardian is based on two observations. First, user-facing tool descriptions and metadata are insufficient for security decisions because they may omit hidden capabilities or side effects. Second, tool authorization depends not only on the tool itself, but also on its observed behavior, delegated capabilities, task context, and interactions with other tools. ToolGuardian therefore combines layered tool characterization with explicit policy reasoning over structured facts. The framework has four stages: tool characterization, fact generation, policy evaluation, and enforcement. During char-acterization, ToolGuardian analyzes tools using progressively richer evidence sources: descriptions, runtime traces, mock execution, and source-level analysis. These sources expose different levels of visibility, from declared functionality to observed effects and latent implementation behavior. The outputs are normalized into structured facts describing capabil-ities, provenance, data access, communication behavior, state mutation, and declared-versus-observed mismatches. ToolGuardian then evaluates these facts using policy realiza-tions. The primary realization is an Answer Set Programming (ASP) policy layer that encodes security rules declaratively over capabilities, effects, task constraints, and multi-tool com-position. For comparison, ToolGuardian also evaluates heuris-tic and LLM-based realizations over the same fact inputs and output contract. This separation between characterization, policy specification, and policy realization enables direct com-parison of enforcement strategies while keeping the security evidence fixed. ToolGuardian supports two complementary enforcement stages. Vetting determines whether a tool should be admitted before use, independent of a specific task. Runtime autho-rization determines whether a particular invocation is allowed under the current task profile. This task-aware stage is neces-sary because the same capability can be safe in one context and unsafe in another: network access may be appropriate for a weather query but inappropriate after sensitive local data has been accessed. Runtime authorization also enables composition-aware enforcement, where individually plausible tool actions can be blocked when their combined workflow creates confidentiality, integrity, or availability risk. V. T OOL CHARACTERIZATION 

ToolGuardian separates evidence collection from policy en-forcement. The characterization stage converts heterogeneous evidence about a tool, including its description, execution behavior, observed effects, and source structure, into structured facts used by the policy layer. This is necessary because natural-language tool descriptions are useful but untrusted: they may omit capabilities, understate side effects, or fail to describe behavior that appears only during execution. 

A. Progressive Evidence Sources 

We organize characterization into four additive evidence levels. Each level captures a different view of tool behavior and exposes different security-relevant properties. Lower levels are cheaper and more broadly available, while higher levels provide richer evidence when the required execution traces or source code are available. 

a) L0: Description-based characterization.: At the coarsest level, ToolGuardian extracts declared functionality from tool-provided descriptions, package metadata, README files, and API specifications. This level captures advertised capabilities and intended use cases. Because this evidence is supplied by the tool provider, it is treated as untrusted: it can guide policy interpretation but cannot by itself establish that the implementation conforms to the declared behavior. 

b) L1: System-call characterization.: ToolGuardian next observes low-level operating-system interactions during tool execution. System-call traces expose coarse capabilities such as file reads and writes, network access, and process execu-tion. This level provides concrete behavioral evidence beyond documentation, but it lacks application-level semantics. For example, a network connection may correspond to normal API access or to covert exfiltration, and the trace alone may not distinguish the two. 

c) L2: Mock execution and observed effects.: To recover higher-level behavioral evidence, ToolGuardian executes tools in a controlled environment with representative inputs and mock external dependencies, similar to emulation-based ap-proaches for identifying agent risks [21]. This level records observable effects such as outbound requests, accessed data categories, command invocations, and local or remote state changes. These effects provide stronger evidence about what the tool actually does under exercised scenarios, but they remain coverage-limited: untested branches may not be ob-served. 

d) L3: Static source analysis.: When source code is available, ToolGuardian analyzes the tool implementation us-ing abstract syntax tree (AST) analysis to identify potential behavior not exercised dynamically. Static analysis can expose latent code paths, conditional branches, embedded endpoints, dangerous API use, and capability combinations that do not appear in a particular trace. This broader coverage is useful for conservative vetting, but it may over-approximate behavior by flagging code that is unreachable or unused in practice. For opaque binaries or closed-source tools, this level is unavail-able. 

B. Effect Conformance 

Beyond identifying individual capabilities, ToolGuardian compares declared intent with observed behavior. In particular, it contrasts L0 descriptions with L2 execution effects to detect mismatches such as undeclared network communication, unex-pected sensitive-data access, silent state mutation, or behavior inconsistent with the advertised task. These declared-versus-observed discrepancies are represented as policy facts rather than resolved inside the characterization pipeline. This allows the policy layer to decide whether a mismatch should cause rejection, restriction, warning, or runtime blocking. 

C. Fact Representation 

All characterization outputs are normalized into a common fact representation. This abstraction decouples evidence collec-tion from policy evaluation and allows heuristic, LLM-based, and ASP-based realizations to operate over comparable inputs. Facts capture tool capabilities, data access, communication behavior, state mutation, provenance, and effect-conformance signals. For example: 

capability(T, network_access). data_access(T, env_vars). observed_http_post(T, Endpoint). modifies_remote_state(T, github_issue). effect_mismatch(T, undeclared_network_access). 

The same fact vocabulary is used for both tool vetting and runtime authorization. During vetting, the fact base summa-rizes the tool’s security-relevant behavior independent of any specific user task. During runtime authorization, these tool facts are combined with task-specific facts, such as whether the task permits network access, sensitive-data handling, or state modification. 

D. Characterization Tiers 

For evaluation, we construct cumulative characterization tiers from the evidence levels above: 

P0 = L0, P1 = P0 ∪ L1, P2 = P1 ∪ L2, P3 = P2 ∪ L3.

These tiers allow us to measure how additional evidence changes policy outcomes. The tiers are cumulative rather than competing alternatives: later tiers retain earlier evidence while adding new observations or static-analysis facts when avail-able. This design supports a controlled analysis of whether richer characterization improves detection, increases over-approximation, or changes the security–utility tradeoff. VI. P OLICY FRAMEWORK 

ToolGuardian separates policy specification from policy realization. Structured characterization facts are first derived from tool descriptions, execution traces, observed effects, and optional source analysis as described in Section V. These facts are then evaluated by a policy layer that produces vetting and runtime authorization decisions. We evaluate three realizations of the same policy intent: heuristic, LLM-based, and ASP-based enforcement. 

A. Policy Model 

ToolGuardian applies security enforcement at two stages:  

> •

Tool vetting : evaluates whether a tool should be admitted into the ecosystem before use.  

> •

Runtime authorization : evaluates whether a specific invocation is permitted within a task context. Both stages operate over normalized characterization facts. Policies reason about capabilities, effects, provenance, infor-mation flow, and observed behavioral mismatches. 

B. Security Principles 

The policy framework is guided by several common security principles: least privilege [22], zero trust for unverified tools [23], capability-oriented access control [24], and information-flow restrictions between sensitive data access and external communication [25]. Runtime enforcement additionally in-corporates effect-conformance checks that compare observed behavior against declared or task-authorized behavior. 

C. Vetting Policy 

The vetting policy evaluates whether a tool presents unac-ceptable risk prior to deployment. Policies reason over capabil-ity combinations, suspicious behavioral indicators, provenance signals, and mismatches between declared intent and observed behavior. ToolGuardian supports four vetting outcomes: (1) deny tool admission, (2) admit with operational restriction, (3) admit with cautionary, and (4) unrestricted admission. Hard rejection rules target high-risk behaviors such as covert network communication, unauthorized code execution, de-structive filesystem activity, or suspicious capability combina-tions. Restricted admission captures tools that are operationally useful but expose elevated-risk functionality such as process execution or sensitive-data access combined with networking. 

D. Runtime Policy 

Runtime authorization evaluates whether a specific tool invocation is consistent with the active task context. Unlike vetting, runtime reasoning incorporates task-level authoriza-tion constraints. Runtime policies evaluate: (1) capability authorization, (2) effect authorization, (3) declared-versus-observed behavior, and (4) multi-tool interaction risk. This allows ToolGuardian to block invocations that may be acceptable in isolation but become unsafe when composed with prior actions in the same workflow. For example, sensitive local-data access followed by unauthorized network commu-nication can be denied even when each individual capability is independently permitted. Runtime decisions produce either allow or block out-comes, along with structured explanation tags describing the triggering policy conditions. 

E. Common Output Contract 

To support fair comparison across realizations, all policy implementations produce a common output schema consisting of decision outcomes, explanation tags, and optional restriction annotations. This normalization allows heuristic, LLM, and ASP realizations to be evaluated using the same scoring methodology despite differences in their internal implemen-tation. 

F. Policy Realizations a) ASP realization.: The ASP realization encodes pol-icy semantics declaratively using Answer Set Programming (ASP). Policy decisions are derived through logical inference over characterization facts, task constraints, and interaction rules. This enables deterministic reasoning, explicit composi-tion across multiple conditions, and audit-friendly explanations derived directly from rule satisfaction. 

b) LLM realization.: The LLM realization evaluates structured characterization facts and task context using prompt-based policy interpretation. The model is instructed to produce structured policy decisions and explanation tags matching the common output contract. This approach is flex-ible and easy to adapt to evolving policy requirements, but its decisions are non-deterministic and less directly auditable than explicit logical rules. 

c) Heuristic realization.: The heuristic realization imple-ments the policy as imperative baseline code. Vetting uses deterministic risk scores derived from tool capabilities, prove-nance, and suspicious indicators, while runtime enforcement checks whether observed capabilities and effects are autho-rized by the task profile. Interactions among capabilities, ef-fects, task context, and multi-tool workflows must be manually encoded as thresholds and conditionals. VII. E VALUATION SETUP 

A. Research Questions 

The evaluation studies four research questions:  

> •

RQ1 (Tool admission). How accurately do policy re-alizations identify malicious tools during vetting while preserving benign-tool utility?  

> •

RQ2 (Runtime protection). How accurately do policy realizations authorize or block task-specific invocations, including atomic and composite workflows?  

> •

RQ3 (Characterization depth). How does progressively richer cumulative characterization, from P0 to P3, affect vetting performance? • RQ4 (Policy realization). How do heuristic, LLM, and ASP realizations compare when evaluated on the same structured policy inputs? 

B. Benchmark Corpus 

The benchmark corpus consists of 16 MCP-style tools: 8 benign tools and 8 malicious variants derived from real open-source MCP implementations. Malicious variants preserve the external functionality and unchanged user-facing descriptions of the original benign tool while embedding behaviors target-ing confidentiality, integrity, or availability. Appendix A lists the benchmark tools. The malicious benchmark includes behaviors such as covert network exfiltration, credential abuse, unauthorized remote modification, destructive operations, and hidden command execution. Several malicious variants intentionally preserve capability-surface similarity with their benign counterparts in order to evaluate whether ToolGuardian can identify behav-ioral and compositional risk beyond simple capability match-ing. Runtime evaluation uses 20 curated invocation scenarios consisting of:  

> •

12 atomic scenarios involving a single tool invocation,  

> •

8 composite scenarios involving multi-step workflows across multiple capabilities or tools. The runtime scenarios include both allow and deny cases and evaluate capability authorization, effect authorization, and compositional enforcement. 

C. Experimental Inputs 

For vetting evaluation, each tool is evaluated using the progressively richer cumulative characterization bundles de-scribed in Section V. Runtime evaluation uses the richest available characterization bundle (P3) together with task-specific authorization facts. The runtime benchmark consists of 20 scenarios designed to test both local authorization decisions and compositional en-forcement. The 12 atomic scenarios evaluate whether a single invocation is consistent with the task profile, such as whether a requested capability or observed effect is authorized. The 7 composite scenarios evaluate multi-step workflows where individually plausible actions may become unsafe in combina-tion, such as sensitive-data access followed by network egress, credential access followed by external communication, or destructive actions propagated across tools, similar to dynamic evaluation environments for agent security [26]. 

D. Policy Realizations and Execution Environment 

All realizations operate over the same normalized charac-terization facts and produce decisions using the shared output contract described in Section VI. 

a) ASP realization.: The ASP realization is evaluated using the Clingo ASP solver [27] through its Python interface. TABLE II: Evaluation scale across vetting and runtime anal-yses.          

> Evaluation Cases Notes
> Vetting 64 16 tools across P0–P3
> Runtime (atomic) 12 Single-invocation scenarios Runtime (composite) 8Multi-step workflows

b) LLM realization.: The LLM realization uses the reasoning-capable open-source model 

openai/gpt-oss-120b accessed through OpenRouter using an OpenAI-compatible API. The evaluation used temperature set to zero to reduce response variability across runs. Input and output token counts were recorded for all evaluations. 

c) Heuristic realization.: The heuristic baseline is imple-mented as imperative Python baseline code using deterministic scoring and authorization logic. 

E. Evaluation Tasks a) Vetting evaluation.: Vetting evaluation measures whether a realization correctly identifies malicious tools while preserving benign-tool utility. Each realization evaluates all 16 tools across characterization tiers P0 through P3, producing 64 vetting decisions per realization. 

b) Runtime evaluation.: Runtime evaluation measures whether a realization correctly authorizes or blocks tool in-vocations within a task context. Each realization evaluates 20 curated runtime scenarios using the richest available character-ization bundle ( P3). Appendix Bcatalogues the runtime tasks The vetting and runtime evaluations are performed indepen-dently in order to isolate policy behavior at each enforcement stage. In a deployed system, a tool denied during vetting would not proceed to runtime authorization. Table II summarizes the evaluation scale. 

F. Metrics 

Vetting evaluation uses binary scoring where reject 

corresponds to a deny prediction and all other outcomes correspond to allow predictions. The positive class is the deny decision. Thus, a true positive is a ground-truth malicious tool predicted as reject , while a true negative is a ground-truth benign tool predicted as admit , restricted_admit , or 

warning . We report confusion matrices, accuracy, and F1 score for the deny class. In addition to binary scoring, we separately analyze par-tial interventions such as restricted_admit outcomes because these represent operational restrictions that are not captured by binary metrics alone. Runtime evaluation uses the same deny-positive convention. A true positive is a ground-truth deny scenario predicted as 

deny , while a true negative is a ground-truth allow sce-nario predicted as allow . We report accuracy and deny-class F1 score over the curated runtime scenarios. Composite workflows are analyzed separately from atomic workflows to evaluate compositional enforcement behavior. TABLE III: Vetting binary F1 by progressive tier and policy realization. The positive class is hard reject for ground-truth deny ; accuracy is shown in parentheses.                    

> Realization P0P1P2P3
> ASP 0.56 (50%) 0.77 (81%) 0.86 (88%) 0.82 (81%) Heuristic 0.56 (50%) 0.77 (81%) 0.86 (88%) 0.76 (69%) LLM null (50%) 0.40 (63%) 0.86 (88%) 0.82 (81%)

TABLE IV: Vetting confusion counts at P3. Positive class is hard reject for ground-truth deny .                

> Realization TP FP FN TN
> ASP 7216Heuristic 8503LLM 7216

VIII. E VALUATION RESULTS 

We report results separately for the two enforcement stages. Vetting measures tool-level admission decisions across pro-gressive characterization tiers P0–P3, while runtime evaluation measures task-specific authorization over 20 curated scenarios at P3. The runtime set includes both atomic scenarios, which test single-invocation conformance, and composite scenarios, which test whether unsafe behavior emerges only from ordered tool interactions. Ground-truth labels are benchmark-defined reference out-comes derived from the intended policy behavior. In the vetting benchmark, benign tools are labeled allow and malicious variants are labeled deny . In the runtime benchmark, each scenario is labeled allow or deny according to whether the invocation or workflow is authorized under its task profile. We use the metrics defined in Section VII and separately discuss partial interventions where they affect interpretation. 

A. Tool Admission Results 1) Binary vetting performance (RQ1, RQ3, RQ4): Table III summarizes binary vetting performance for the ASP, heuristic, and LLM realizations at each progressive tier. All realizations receive the same structured facts at a given tier; only the policy realization differs. Note that at P0, the LLM never outputs hard reject, so deny-precision and F1 are undefined (zero true positives). 

a) Tool admission performance (RQ1).: The best vetting performance occurs at P2, where all three realizations reach F1 0.86 and 88% accuracy. At this tier, progressive charac-terization exposes enough behavioral evidence to reject most malicious tools while avoiding hard rejects on benign tools under the binary metric. At P3, ASP and the LLM retain the same F1 of 0.82, while the heuristic drops to F1 0.76 because it hard-rejects more benign tools. Table IV shows the P3 tradeoff in terms of false positives and false negatives. The heuristic achieves perfect malicious recall, with no false negatives, but this comes at the cost of five benign false rejects. ASP and the LLM each produce one TABLE V: Partial vetting outcomes on ground-truth malicious tools. Each cell reports partial / hard reject , where partial is restricted_admit or warning .                

> Realization P0P1P2P3
> ASP 0 / 5 3 / 5 2 / 6 1 / 7 Heuristic 0 / 5 3 / 5 2 / 6 0 / 8 LLM 5 / 0 6 / 2 2 / 6 1 / 7

malicious false allow and two benign false rejects, yielding a less aggressive but better-balanced security–utility tradeoff. 

b) Effect of characterization depth (RQ3).: Characteri-zation depth improves vetting from P0 through P2, but the trend is not monotonic. Moving from P0 to P1 improves ASP F1 from 0.56 to 0.77 because description-only facts miss several malicious tools with process-execution behavior, while syscall-derived evidence exposes additional risky activity. P2

achieves the best ASP F1 on this corpus. Adding static-analysis evidence at P3 increases policy visibility but also triggers hard reject outcomes on two benign tools with high-risk administrative and network-facing capabilities. Thus, richer characterization reveals more security-relevant structure, but the utility outcome depends on how aggressively high-risk benign capabilities are interpreted. 

c) Policy realization comparison (RQ4).: At P2, ASP, heuristic, and LLM realizations tie on F1. At P3, ASP and the LLM match each other, while the heuristic achieves perfect malicious recall by hard-rejecting all eight malicious tools but incurs five benign false rejects. At P0, the LLM never predicts hard reject ; it issues warning on five malicious tools instead. This suggests that sparse description-level facts are insufficient for reliable LLM deny decisions, whereas the ASP and heuristic realizations can still apply explicit conservative rules. 

B. Partial Interventions and Vetting Failure Cases 

Binary allow/deny metrics do not capture the difference between full admission and restricted admission. This distinc-tion matters for deployment because restricted_admit 

preserves binary utility while still imposing operational con-straints. 

a) Partial interventions on malicious tools.: Table V counts partial outcomes on the eight ground-truth malicious tools at each tier. At P3, ASP and the LLM hard-reject seven of eight malicious tools. The remaining malicious variant re-ceives restricted_admit , which reflects risk recognition without a hard denial under the primary binary metric. The heuristic hard-rejects all eight malicious tools at P3, but this comes with greater benign-tool overblocking, discussed below. 

b) Partial interventions on benign tools.: Table VI shows ASP outcomes on benign tools across characterization tiers. Under our binary scoring, restricted_admit is counted as an allow decision; therefore, the six restricted benign tools at P3 are true negatives rather than false positives. However, these outcomes still represent operational friction because the tool is admitted only with restrictions. TABLE VI: ASP outcomes on benign tools across character-ization tiers. ground-truth label is allow for all eight tools.                

> Tier restricted_admit reject admit
> P0350
> P1800
> P2800
> P3620

TABLE VII: Benign-tool outcomes at P3 by policy realization. ground-truth label is allow for all eight tools.             

> Realization restricted_admit reject admit
> ASP 620LLM 620Heuristic 350

At P1 and P2, ASP avoids hard false rejects but places every benign tool into restricted_admit . At P3, static-analysis evidence exposes additional high-risk capability combinations, causing two benign tools to be hard rejected while six remain restricted. This explains why P3 has a lower binary F1 than 

P2 despite richer evidence. Table VII compares benign-tool outcomes across realiza-tions at P3. ASP and the LLM produce the same pattern: six restricted admits and two hard rejects. The heuristic is more conservative, hard-rejecting five benign tools. No re-alization fully admits any benign tool at P3, indicating that high-visibility characterization shifts the policy problem from simple malicious-tool detection to calibrated restriction. 

c) Representative vetting failure.: A benign administra-tive tool (Tool 011, Appendix A) illustrates this calibration challenge. At shallower tiers, the tool receives warnings or restricted admission. At P3, ASP and the LLM hard-reject the benign tool because static analysis exposes powerful capability combinations such as external process execution, code execu-tion, and screen capture. The decision is defensible under a conservative admission policy, but it is a false reject under the ground-truth label. This case shows that high-risk capabilities are not themselves malicious; the policy must distinguish legitimate administrative tools from malicious variants without eliminating useful tooling. 

d) LLM token cost.: Table VIII reports average input and output token use for the LLM-based evaluations. For P3

vetting, the LLM averages 2,156 input tokens and 584 output tokens per tool evaluation. Runtime evaluation requires slightly larger prompts under the full policy specification, while the ablated runtime prompt roughly halves input token use at the cost of reduced accuracy, as discussed in Section VIII-D. 

C. Runtime Authorization Results 1) Primary runtime evaluation at P3 (RQ2, RQ4): All runtime scenarios use full tool characterization ( P3). Table IX shows perfect agreement with ground-truth labels for ASP, heuristic, and the fully specified LLM prompt: all three realiza-tions correctly classify 20 of 20 runtime scenarios, including TABLE VIII: Average token use for LLM-based policy eval-uation.          

> Condition Avg. input tokens Avg. output tokens
> Vetting at P32,156 584 Runtime, full prompt 2,748 586 Runtime, ablated prompt 1,399 347

TABLE IX: Runtime accuracy at P3 on 20 scenarios: 12 atomic and 8 composite.             

> Realization Overall Atomic Composite
> ASP 20/20 12/12 8/8 Heuristic 20/20 12/12 8/8 LLM 20/20 12/12 8/8

12 atomic and 7 composite cases. These results show that, given rich structured facts and complete policy specifications, all three realizations can enforce the curated runtime catalog correctly. The catalog is small and co-designed with the policy rules, so this result validates specification–implementation alignment rather than deployment-scale coverage. Composite workflows are analyzed as part of RQ2 rather than as a separate research question. Under the full runtime policies, all three realizations block the ground-truth deny composite workflows while allowing the benign composites in the catalog. 

D. Runtime Policy-Specification Ablations 

To measure how much explicit policy structure each re-alization requires beyond facts, we ran secondary runtime studies that weaken the LLM or heuristic specifications while holding P3 facts fixed. These studies are not separate RQs; they explain why the fully specified runtime results hold. In this subsection, FP denotes an incorrect block on a ground-truth allow scenario, and FN denotes an incorrect allow on a ground-truth deny scenario. 

a) LLM prompt ablation.: The LLM ablation removes explicit runtime rules, the compositional-risk table, and closed reason codes while keeping the same P3 facts. As shown in Table X, accuracy drops from 100% to 75.0% and deny-class F1 drops from 1.00 to 0.84. The ablated prompt produces four false denies on ground-truth allow scenarios and one false allow on a ground-truth deny scenario, indicating that structured facts alone are insufficient without explicit task– capability and composition guidance. 

b) Heuristic ablations.: We evaluate two weakened heuristic variants to isolate the contribution of compositional and conformance-specific rules. The first removes compo-sitional source–sink reasoning and composite-flow excep-tions while retaining atomic authorization checks. The sec-ond further simplifies the heuristic by removing command-class exceptions for controlled capability/effect conformance, member-invocation composite propagation, and the blocked-by-composite cascade. Removing compositional reasoning preserves atomic cor-rectness but falsely allows four composite deny scenarios TABLE X: LLM runtime prompt ablation at P3 (20 scenarios).             

> Variant Accuracy F1 deny FP FN
> Full prompt 100% 1.00 00Ablated prompt 75.0% 0.84 41

TABLE XI: Heuristic runtime ablations at P3 (20 scenarios).                 

> Variant Acc. F1 FP FN Atom. Comp.
> Full 100% 1.00 0012/12 8/8 No comp. 80.0% 0.83 0412/12 4/8 Simplified 60.0% 0.67 2610/12 2/8

(including CT5 cases that remain blocked under the full heuristic). The simplified variant further introduces two atomic false rejects and misses six composite denials. These ablations show that runtime security depends not only on observed tool facts, but also on explicit policy structure for composition, controlled conformance exceptions, and propagation across multi-step workflows. 

E. Compositional Runtime Case Study 

The aggregate runtime results show that compositional poli-cies detect unsafe multi-tool workflows that are not exposed by single-invocation checks alone. To make this behavior concrete, Appendix C walks through a representative benign-tool composition in which a database query tool and a GitHub project-management tool are individually admissible, but their ordered use is denied because database records flow toward an external remote update. IX. D ISCUSSION 

A. Summary of Findings 

The evaluation supports four main findings. First, structured tool characterization improves policy visibility, but the benefit is not purely monotonic. Dynamic evidence at intermediate characterization depth improves malicious-tool detection while preserving most benign utility, whereas richer static evidence can also expose powerful but legitimate benign capabilities that lead to additional restrictions or hard rejects. Second, runtime authorization is easier to make accurate when the policy explicitly represents task context, authorized effects, and multi-step composition. Third, ASP provides deterministic and auditable policy enforcement, while heuristic and LLM realizations expose different tradeoffs in engineering effort, adaptability, and predictability. Fourth, LLM-based policy evaluation performs well under structured inputs and explicit prompts, but the ablation results show that this performance depends heavily on policy guidance rather than facts alone. 

B. Characterization Depth and Security–Utility Tradeoffs 

The results show that characterization depth should be interpreted as increased policy visibility rather than automatic improvement in end-to-end utility. Description-only character-ization provides limited evidence and leaves the policy with high uncertainty. Adding execution-derived evidence makes malicious behavior more visible and improves the ability to distinguish declared functionality from observed behavior. However, static source analysis also exposes high-risk capa-bilities in benign tools, such as process execution, network access, or sensitive-data handling. This creates a security–utility tradeoff. A conservative policy may treat these capabilities as unacceptable and re-ject benign tools, while a permissive policy may admit tools that expose dangerous combinations of authority. The partial-intervention results make this tradeoff visible: sev-eral benign tools are not hard rejected, but they are admit-ted only under restrictions. Thus, binary allow/deny metrics are necessary but insufficient; operational outcomes such as 

restricted_admit capture the usability cost of cautious enforcement. 

C. Composition as the Hard Runtime Case 

The runtime results and ablations suggest that atomic au-thorization is not the main difficulty. Checking whether a single invocation uses an authorized capability or produces an authorized effect can be implemented by all three realizations when the relevant facts and task profile are available. The harder problem is composition: individually plausible actions may become unsafe when combined within a workflow. This is where declarative enforcement is most useful. Com-position can be represented as relationships among sources, sinks, effects, task permissions, and prior invocations. ASP naturally supports these multi-condition dependencies because rules can derive blocking decisions from combinations of facts rather than from manually ordered conditionals. The heuristic ablations reinforce this point: removing compositional source– sink reasoning preserves atomic correctness but causes failures on composite deny cases. 

D. Cost of Declarative Enforcement 

In our experiments, Clingo solver overhead was negligible relative to characterization and LLM evaluation. The more important cost was the effort required to design the rule vocab-ulary, encode vetting and runtime policies, define exceptions for legitimate behavior, and validate the resulting decisions. This shifts the engineering burden from runtime decision-making to policy specification. This tradeoff is appropriate when auditability and consis-tency are important. ASP does not eliminate the need for expert judgment; instead, it makes that judgment executable and inspectable. The rules provide a concrete artifact that can be reviewed, tested, ablated, and revised. This is preferable to hidden decision logic, but it also means that the quality of the enforcement system depends on the quality of the policy specification. 

E. Policy Correctness 

ASP provides determinism, but determinism is not the same as correctness. The ASP rules should be viewed as an executable policy specification, not as a proof that the policy is complete. A wrong rule, missing exception, or incomplete characterization fact can still produce an incorrect decision. The evaluation provides empirical evidence for rule be-havior through ground-truth labeled cases, confusion matri-ces, ablation studies, explanation tags, and manual inspection of representative failures. These checks increase confidence that the implemented rules match the intended policy on the benchmark, but they do not establish completeness over all possible tools or workflows. Future policy development should therefore include rule-coverage tests, mutation tests, independently authored scenarios, and formal safety invariants for critical policy properties. 

F. Interpreting LLM Performance 

The LLM results are encouraging because the model used in the study is an open-source reasoning model rather than a closed frontier model selected solely for maximum capability. However, this result should be interpreted carefully. The LLM was not asked to inspect arbitrary raw code without structure; it received normalized characterization facts, explicit policy guidance, and a fixed output contract. These constraints sub-stantially reduce ambiguity and reduce input size compared with sending full tool implementations or raw execution arti-facts to the model. Even so, LLM-based evaluation still incurs recurring input and output token costs for each vetting or runtime decision, unlike the ASP and heuristic realizations after their policies are specified. The results suggest that LLMs can be useful policy evalu-ators when placed inside a structured enforcement workflow. They are less convincing as standalone security authorities. The ablation results show that when explicit guidance is removed, performance degrades even though the underlying facts remain available. This supports the broader design choice in ToolGuardian: LLMs may assist policy interpretation, but the policy should remain explicit, testable, and independently auditable. X. L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

A. Benchmark Scope 

The evaluation uses a controlled benchmark of 16 MCP-style tools and 20 runtime scenarios. This scale is sufficient to study the proposed policy mechanisms and compare re-alizations under consistent inputs, but it does not cover the full diversity of the MCP ecosystem. The benchmark includes representative confidentiality, integrity, and availability attacks, but additional tool categories, implementation styles, and deployment environments may expose different failure modes. Future work should expand the benchmark to include more MCP servers, independently developed benign tools, third-party malicious tools, and larger collections of real-world agent-tool integrations. A larger benchmark would also enable more stable estimates of false positive and false negative rates. 

B. MCP-Focused Evaluation 

ToolGuardian is evaluated on MCP-style tools because MCP provides a concrete and increasingly common abstraction for agent-tool interaction. However, other agent-tool ecosystems may expose different metadata, invocation semantics, permis-sion models, sandboxing assumptions, and logging mecha-nisms. The policy concepts are intended to be broader than MCP, but the current implementation and evaluation are MCP-centered. Future work should evaluate the approach on browser agents, code-execution agents, cloud API agents, plugin ecosystems, and enterprise automation tools. These environ-ments may require additional characterization facts and policy rules. 

C. Composition Depth 

The runtime benchmark includes both atomic and com-posite scenarios, but the composition study is bounded. The composite cases focus on short workflows where risk arises from combining a small number of actions, such as sensitive-data access followed by network egress or destructive behavior propagated through a workflow. Real agents may execute longer task chains in which risk accumulates through indirect dependencies, repeated trans-formations, delayed effects, or intermediate artifacts. Future work should extend the runtime policy to longer histories, temporal constraints, provenance tracking across invocations, and workflow-level safety invariants. XI. C ONCLUSION 

Tool-augmented LLM agents require security mechanisms that reason about executable tools, delegated capabilities, task context, and multi-step workflows. This paper presented ToolGuardian, a policy-driven framework that separates tool characterization from enforcement and supports both pre-admission vetting and task-aware runtime authorization. By converting heterogeneous evidence into structured facts, Tool-Guardian enables heuristic, LLM-based, and ASP-based policy realizations to be evaluated over the same inputs. Our results show that structured characterization improves policy visibility while exposing a security–utility tradeoff. For vetting, the ASP realization achieves its best result at 

P2, with deny-class F1 of 0.86 and 88% accuracy. Richer static evidence at P3 reveals additional high-risk behavior, but can also increase restrictions or hard rejects on benign high-capability tools. Runtime results show that task-aware authorization is ef-fective when policies explicitly represent capabilities, effects, and composition. All three fully specified realizations correctly classify the 20 runtime scenarios, while ablations show that removing compositional reasoning or weakening the LLM prompt causes failures even with the same characterization facts. REFERENCES [1] Anthropic, “Model context protocol,” https://modelcontextprotocol.io/, 2024, technical documentation. [2] Y. Hu, Y. Jia, M. Li, D. Song, and N. Gong, “MalTool: Malicious tool attacks on LLM agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12194 , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12194 [3] Y. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Deng, Y. Li, J. Ning, Y. Zhang, and L. Y. Zhang, “Malicious agent skills in the wild: A large-scale security empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06547 , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06547 [4] D. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Luo, X. Liu, P. Li, and W. Xu, “MCP security bench (MSB): Benchmarking attacks against model context protocol in LLM agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15994 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.15994 [5] X. Zong, Z. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Lan, and C. Yang, “MCP-SafetyBench: A benchmark for safety evaluation of large language models with real-world MCP servers,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2026) . OpenReview.net, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=7XYjeL46co [6] Y. Yang, C. Gao, D. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Li, and S. Wang, “MCPSecBench: A systematic security benchmark and playground for testing model context protocols,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13220 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.13220 [7] J. Shi, Z. Yuan, G. Tie, P. Zhou, N. Z. Gong, and L. Sun, “Prompt injection attack to tool selection in LLM agents,” in 

Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2026) . San Diego, CA, USA: Internet Society, Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/ prompt-injection-attack-to-tool-selection-in-llm-agents/ [8] Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang, “InjecAgent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024, pp. 10 471–10 506. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.624/ [9] Cisco AI Defense, “mcp-scanner: Scan MCP servers for potential threats & security findings,” https://github.com/cisco-ai-defense/mcp-scanner, 2025, gitHub repository, accessed: 2026-05-24. [10] MCPScan.ai, “MCPScan.ai: Online security scanner for Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers,” https://mcpscan.ai/, 2025, web-based MCP security scanning platform, accessed: 2026-05-24. [11] T. Shi, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Li, L. Wu, W. Guo, and D. Song, “Progent: Securing AI agents with privilege control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11703 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 11703 [12] W. Zhao, Z. Li, P. Zhang, and J. Sun, “ClawGuard: A runtime security framework for tool-augmented LLM agents against indirect prompt injection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.11790 , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.11790 [13] F. Jia, T. Wu, X. Qin, and A. Squicciarini, “The task shield: Enforcing task alignment to defend against indirect prompt injection in LLM agents,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .Vienna, Austria: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2025, pp. 29 680–29 697. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2025. acl-long.1435/ [14] T. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Wang, K. Guo, X. Xu, B. Xiao, Q. Guan, J. Fan, J. Liu, Z. Liu et al. , “AgentSentry: Mitigating indirect prompt injection in LLM agents via temporal causal diagnostics and context purification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22724 , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22724 [15] Y. He, H. Zhu, Y. Li, S. Shao, H. Yao, Z. Liu, and Z. Qin, “AttriGuard: Defeating indirect prompt injection in LLM agents via causal attribution of tool invocations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.10749 , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.10749 [16] S. Jajodia, P. Samarati, V. S. Subrahmanian, and E. Bertino, “A unified framework for enforcing multiple access control policies,” ACM SIG-MOD Record , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 474–485, 1997. [17] M. Blaze, J. Feigenbaum, and J. Lacy, “Decentralized trust manage-ment,” in Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . Oakland, CA, USA: IEEE, May 1996, pp. 164–173. [18] M. Y. Becker, C. Fournet, and A. D. Gordon, “SecPAL: Design and se-mantics of a decentralized authorization language,” Journal of Computer Security , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 619–665, 2010. [19] G. Brewka, T. Eiter, and M. Truszczynski, “Answer set programming at a glance,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 92–103, 2011. [20] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injections,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec ’23) . ACM, 2023. [21] Y. Ruan, H. Dong, A. Wang, S. Pitis, Y. C. Zhou, J. Ba, Y. Dubois, C. J. Maddison, and T. Hashimoto, “Identifying the risks of LM agents with an LM-emulated sandbox,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=GEcwtMk1uA [22] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder, “The protection of information in computer systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 1278– 1308, 1975. [23] S. Rose, O. Borchert, S. Mitchell, and S. Connelly, “Zero trust architecture,” National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Tech. Rep. Special Publication 800-207, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207 [24] R. N. Watson, J. Anderson, B. Laurie, and K. Kennaway, “Capsicum: Practical capabilities for UNIX,” in Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 2010) . Washington, DC, USA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/sec10/tech/full papers/Watson.pdf [25] D. E. Denning, “A lattice model of secure information flow,” Commu-nications of the ACM , vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 236–243, 1976. [26] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and F. Tram` er, “Agentdojo: a dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for LLM agents,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. NIPS ’24. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2024. [27] M. Gebser, R. Kaminski, B. Kaufmann, and T. Schaub, Answer Set Solving in Practice , ser. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2012. APPENDIX ATOOL BENCHMARKS 

Benchmark tool corpus (16 MCP tools: 8 benign, 8 malicious). 

Tool ID Type Description Malicious activity 

tool 001 Benign Shell/process execution for agent file and command operations —tool 002 Benign MCP command server for version-control and diagnostic shell commands —tool 003 Benign GitHub project-management API client —tool 004 Benign SQL transpiler exposed as an MCP net-work service —tool 005 Benign Weather lookup via external HTTP API —tool 006 Malicious Database query MCP (db-mcp family) Exfiltrates retrieved database records to a remote endpoint tool 007 Benign PDF-to-Markdown document conver-sion —tool 008 Malicious GitHub project-management API client (variant) Performs unauthorized remote project/item deletion tool 009 Malicious GitHub project-management API client (variant) Poisons or mutates remote project fields without authorization tool 010 Malicious GitHub project-management API client (variant) Abuses stored credentials/tokens for unau-thorized API requests tool 011 Benign Terminal controller for shell/process-based local operations —tool 012 Malicious Shell/process execution MCP (MCPExec family) Sends covert outbound beacons during otherwise legitimate command execution tool 013 Malicious Shell/process execution MCP (MCPExec family) Reads local files and exfiltrates content to a remote server tool 014 Malicious PDF-to-Markdown converter (variant) Reads document content and exfiltrates it over the network tool 015 Malicious Terminal controller (variant) Performs local file search/read and exfil-trates content remotely tool 016 Benign Database query and retrieval MCP —

APPENDIX BTASKS - A TOMIC AND COMPOSITE 

Runtime task catalog: atomic tasks (T1–T6) and compositional templates (CT1–CT7). 

ID Kind Description 

T1 Atomic Basic file listing T2 Atomic Version control operations T3 Atomic Sensitive data retrieval T4 Atomic Local project file search T5 Atomic System file deletion T6 Atomic External network requests CT1 Composite Local project analysis followed by external network transmission CT2 Composite Purely local read-only workflow CT3 Composite Collect diagnostic or version-control state and upload a diagnostic report CT4 Composite Sensitive data retrieval followed by another external request CT5 Composite Read local project context and then perform a remote mutation CT6 Composite Destructive local state change followed by external propagation CT7 Composite Credential-bearing local context followed by network use 

APPENDIX CCASE STUDY : T OOL GUARDIAN ENFORCEMENT ON A MALICIOUS TOOL 

A. Case Study: Benign Tools, Unsafe Composition 

This appendix illustrates ToolGuardian’s enforcement workflow using a representative runtime composition: database-record access followed by a GitHub project update. The example uses two benign tools from the benchmark corpus: tool_016 ,a database query and retrieval MCP, and tool_003 , a GitHub project-management API client. Each tool is individually admissible during vetting, and each invocation is locally consistent with its task context. The workflow is denied only at runtime because the ordered composition creates a sensitive-data-to-external-service flow. 

B. Vetting Phase 

Vetting is performed before a tool is admitted for use and is independent of a particular user task. In this case study, the two tools expose different benign capability profiles: the database tool can read database records, while the GitHub client can perform external project-management updates. Neither tool, by itself, combines sensitive-data access with an external transmission behavior. Listing 1: Representative vetting facts for the case-study tools.        

> tool(tool_016). capability(tool_016, database_access). observed_effect(tool_016, database_read). accesses_data(tool_016, database_records). tool(tool_003). capability(tool_003, network_access). observed_effect(tool_003, http_request). observed_effect(tool_003, remote_mutation). http_domain(tool_003, "api.github.example").

Listing 2 shows the relevant vetting logic in abridged form. The policy rejects tools whose own characterized behavior combines sensitive-data access with external network communication. Since tool_016 provides the sensitive read and 

tool_003 provides the external update, but neither tool independently combines both behaviors, both are admitted by vetting. Listing 2: Abridged vetting rules for the case study.                    

> %Tool-level sensitive-data access.
> sensitive_data_tool(T) :-accesses_data(T, database_records).
> %Tool-level external communication.
> external_network_tool(T) :-capability(T, network_access), observed_effect(T, http_request).
> %Tool-level denial.
> deny_tool(T, sensitive_data_network_risk) :-sensitive_data_tool(T), external_network_tool(T). vetting_decision(T, admit) :-tool(T),
> not deny_tool(T, _).

Listing 3: Derived vetting outcomes.   

> vetting_decision(tool_016, admit). vetting_decision(tool_003, admit).

C. Runtime Phase 

Runtime enforcement is task-aware. In the case-study workflow, the first invocation reads database_records under a task that permits database access, and the second invocation updates a GitHub project item under a task that permits external project-management actions. The individual invocations are locally authorized, but their ordering exposes a sensitive-data-to-external-service flow. Listing 4: Abridged runtime rules for the case study.                                           

> %Atomic capability conformance.
> direct_block(I) :-invocation(I), task_id(I, Tid), runtime_capability(I, Cap), controlled_capability(Cap),
> not runtime_capability_ok(I, Tid, Cap).
> %Atomic effect conformance. direct_block(I) :-invocation(I), task_id(I, Tid), runtime_effect(I, Effect), controlled_effect(Effect),
> not runtime_effect_ok(I, Tid, Effect).
> %Source/sink classification for composition.
> source_class(I, sensitive_read) :-runtime_data_access(I, Data), sensitive_data_access(Data). sink_class(I, external_project_update) :-runtime_effect(I, http_request), runtime_effect(I, remote_mutation).
> %Ordered sensitive-data-to-external-service risk.
> compositional_risk(C, sensitive_externalization) :-active_composite(C), before(C, I, J), source_class(I, sensitive_read), sink_class(J, external_project_update),
> not composite_allows_flow(C, sensitive_external_transfer). composite_block(C) :-compositional_risk(C, _).

For the case-study workflow, the database-read invocation is not blocked by the atomic checks because the task authorizes 

database_access and database_read . The GitHub-update invocation is also not blocked by the atomic checks because the task authorizes the external project update. The deny decision is derived only from the compositional rule: a sensitive read occurs before an external project update, and no explicit safe-flow exception applies. Listing 5: Derived runtime outcome.  

> compositional_risk(c08_benign_db_to_github_update, sensitive_externalization). composite_block(c08_benign_db_to_github_update). runtime_decision(c08_benign_db_to_github_update, deny).

This example separates the role of vetting and runtime enforcement. Vetting admits both tools because each is benign in isolation. Runtime enforcement denies the workflow because the combination of an authorized database read followed by an authorized external project update creates a policy-relevant data-flow risk. LLM U SAGE STATEMENT 

a) Declaration of Generative AI and AI-Assisted Technologies in the Writing Process: During the preparation of this work, the authors utilized conversational AI chatbots (ChatGPT) to interactively review, draft sections, and improve the overall writing quality and grammatical structure of the manuscript. 

b) Declaration of AI-Assisted Technologies in the Research and Development Process: During the implementation phase of the ToolGuardian project, AI-driven coding agents (Cursor and OpenCode) was employed to assist with software prototyping, code generation, and debugging. 

c) Human Oversight Statement: For all phases of writing and development, the underlying logic, system architecture, and final validation of both the manuscript text and the software codebase were strictly directed, reviewed, and verified by the human authors, who accept full responsibility for the integrity of the final work.