Title: Why Trust Your Agent? Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28666v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:19:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# WHY TRUST YOUR AGENT ? E MPIRICAL SECURITY GAINS FROM TR ISM-G UIDED AGENTIC WORKFLOWS IN 

# HEALTHCARE 

Liam Kearns 

AuraQ Malvern Worcestershire UK 

liamkearnsy@gmail.com 

# ABSTRACT 

Agent-based AI has enabled the automation of tasks by exposing application tools and resources to large language models (LLMs). However, to improve scope and accuracy, agents are often given access rights that exceed those of ordinary users, introducing significant security risks. AI is rou-tinely integrated into applications with a disregard to security, risking data exposure and breaching regulations. This paper applies the AI Trust, Risk, and Security Management (TRiSM) framework to a medical report-generation application to demonstrate how an insecure agent workflow can be transformed into security-conscious agentic workflow. Both workflows were evaluated across five LLMs (Claude Haiku 4.5, GPT-4.1-nano, GPT-4.1-mini, GPT-5.4-mini, and Gemini 2.5 Flash) on two report types, totalling 800 generations and 500 attack scenarios including RAG poisoning, data-field injection, and client-side network injection. The TRiSM-guided agentic workflow reduced mean attack success rates from 31% to 10% for RAG poisoning and from 42% to 25% for data-field injection, while eliminating the network injection vector entirely through server-side prompt con-struction. Furthermore, report accuracy increased by 14 percentage points (72.5% to 86.5%) with the agentic workflow, demonstrating a secure design which provides more reliable outputs. This pa-per contributes to knowledge by demonstrating least-privilege, defence in depth agentic workflows improving security and accuracy, while also highlighting model choice is a necessary architectural consideration. 

Keywords agentic AI · TRiSM · prompt injection · security 

# 1 Introduction 

Agentic applications have become a popular way to infuse AI capabilities into projects. Agents, often powered by LLMs, work more effectively when provided with sufficient data sources and application tools. While this allows agentic AI to be used in high-value scopes, such as medical diagnosis, this can raise patient safety concerns due to the accountability and transparency of these automated decisions [1]. Not only does this risk exposure of sensitive data to the hosts of the AI models, but also risks exposure to malicious users who can intercept requests going to the AI and consequently the sensitive information being sent. Recent advances have expanded the capabilities of agentic workflows. Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers provide structured protocols in which agents can invoke tools and execute actions, while Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with vector knowledge bases gives agents access to context specific information at inference time. However, these components create a greater attack surface for agentic workflows. MCP tool logic can be redacted, making it difficult to map out security risks. Similarly, knowledge bases are not guaranteed to comply with the same access controls as application databases, increasing the risk of sensitive information being compromised. 

> arXiv:2606.28666v1 [cs.CR] 27 Jun 2026

Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare Integration of AI into projects must go through appropriate frameworks to ensure risks are managed. Without manag-ing risks, insecure development practices, such as inexperienced vibe coding, whereby AI-generated code is integrated with minimal review, can expose agents to be exploited through risks from injection and insecure design with vibe coding producing functional but insecure code [2]. To control such risks, frameworks such as AI Trust, Risk, and Security Management (TRiSM) can map out model governance and trustworthiness. This paper investigates the vulnerabilities introduced by improper agent integration and how these risks can be re-duced through TRiSM-guided workflows. Security challenges from the complexity of agent execution logic have been highlighted by previous research [3], but steps to mitigate these vulnerabilities can be under-represented. Additionally, the risks of using single-agent workflows for agentic AI task introduces risks of overwhelming the underlying LLM, increasing chances of malicious prompts succeeding. The motivation to design the TRiSM-guided agentic work-flow came from existing application architecture using basic REST API logic to interact with LLMs with minimal guardrails, risking the credibility of AI outputs and the security of the application as a whole. The scope of this paper is focused on using AI agents to generate medical reports in a medical application. Figure 1 illustrates clinical encounter information from the medical application using agents, tools, and resources to generate medical reports for standard and Covid-19 encounters. This application uses LLM generative capabilities to also generate recommended treatments if not provided by the attending physician. This scope provides a clear scenario to implement a secure agentic workflow to protect the application and patient data alongside the accuracy of generated reports. 

Figure 1: Medical application using AI agents to generate medical reports. The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 investigates significant attack vectors that AI-powered applications need to defend against. Section 3 outlines the insecure agent workflow and TRiSM-guided agentic workflow as well as efficiency metrics. Next, Section 4 discusses the vulnerabilities and performance of both workflows across various LLM models. Subsequently, Section 5 outlines the final recommended agentic workflow which is influenced by TRiSM principles. 

1.1 Contributions 

In this paper, vulnerabilities in AI-powered apps are identified and controlled through risk management. The paper’s major contributions are as followed: • Applying TRiSM principles to an operational medical agentic application, showing which concrete architec-tural controls each principle maps to. • Demonstrating that the TRiSM-guided redesign, of which the multi-agent workflow is a consequence, reduces attack success across three vectors and five models while improving report accuracy. • Identifying the vulnerability classes that emerge when LLM agents are granted access beyond the underlying user’s permissions, with per-model attack-success benchmarks. 2Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare 

# 2 Related works 

AI capabilities can be implemented in various ways within applications, each introducing its own risks. This section reviews the vulnerabilities most relevant to LLM-integrated medical applications and shows that existing mitigations address each vulnerability in isolation, but rarely in a combined architectural response for a medical application. Additionally, the AI Trust, Risk, and Security Management (TRiSM) framework is introduced that aims to mitigate these risks. 

2.1 Injection attacks 

Prompts sent to LLMs can be manipulated without attackers having access to model gradients or weights. These prompt injection attacks can be used for prompt leaking or code generation with a high success rate in LLM-integrated applications [4]. Even when mitigated against through instructing the output to be a specific phrase or format (known-answer detection), LLMs used in decision making can still be heavily influenced by prompt injection [5]. This high-lights how injection attacks can impact LLM evaluations and bypass detection techniques in the output. Injection attacks can be mitigated against by enforcing input and output formats and time constraints on outputs [4]. However, indirect injection attacks can occur through attackers injecting prompts into data which will be used to build prompts [6]. Injection opportunities increase significantly when using RAG, where an attacker can subtly change semantics to introduce bias into retrieved information [7]. With data and instructions both being used in prompts, injection attacks can be the consequence of traditional data integrity attacks such as data tampering and SQL injections. For medical applications, injection attacks can pose danger to patient confidentiality and physical wellbeing. RAG is often used in medical scenarios to provide a ground truth, but clinically phrased injections can influence treatment decisions or fabricate evidence [8]. This highlights the need for safety controls at the orchestration layer of AI-powered workflows rather than expecting models to identify suspected injected data. 

2.2 Inference attacks 

Success in integrating LLMs into applications often comes with customising infrastructure. Fine-tuning models for users who interact frequently can tailor responses effectively but also create vulnerabilities if a malicious user can access the fine-tuning samples [9]. This is a particular risk for data-poor applications, where fine-tuning relies on a small set of user-contributed data. Training data can be exposed by manipulating the structure of models. Data leakage can occur through manipulating model gradients to reconstruct training data in a few iterations [10]. LLMs are susceptible to other types of inference attacks, such as outputs exposing input prompts that are hidden from end users [11]. If attackers already have access to suspected training data, the LLM weights or gradients are not required to perform an inference attack to determine if the model has used that data in its training [12]. To reduce the risk of model inference, noise can be added while training the model. However, this reduces the accuracy of the model [10]. This highlights the risk of reducing model accuracy to protect against data leaks. Accuracy and confidentiality are essential for AI-powered medical applications. While synthetic health data aims to protect patient privacy, it is susceptible to inference attacks where legitimate patient data has been used to generate synthetic records [13]. Medical images are also vulnerable to being reconstructed by attackers through inference. While model perturbation can reduce successful attacks, it can significantly reduce accuracy if too much noise is added to the model [14]. Therefore, data minimisation and least-privilege access need to be implemented into workflows using AI to reduce the risk of inference attacks on patient data. 

2.3 Memory poisoning 

Accepting unstructured inputs allows LLMs to be accessible to non-technical users but also makes them poor at sepa-rating chat history from new input. This allows tampering with chat history which is difficult to detect [15]. Tampering can be reduced through application-level controls to prevent users from directly interacting with knowledge bases that provide inputs to LLM agents. Furthermore, dynamic permissions can be implemented so that only knowledge bases relevant to the current task are accessible [16]. However, if knowledge bases are produced from external or untrusted sources, attackers can inject malicious instances to poison the database [17]. This highlights that inputs from untrusted sources can lead to poisoning chat history if appropriate access controls are ignored. 3Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare The risk compounds when knowledge bases also serve as semantic memory for agents. In multi-agent systems, poisoned memory can propagate between agents [18], creating an attack surface that is not present in single-agent systems. Multi-defence frameworks exist to reduce injection risks through content filtering and response verification. However, attacks such as instruction overrides still have an attack success rate of over 10% with this multi-defence framework [19]. This indicates that attacks through untrusted knowledge bases can still evade detection through multi-agent systems, requiring defence-in-depth at the framework level. 

2.4 Tool misuse 

Giving agents direct access to application databases can improve response accuracy, but expands the attack surface significantly. Unrestricted access to a database creates a new entry point via agents, whereby any vulnerability in agent logic can become a path to unauthorised data exposure [20]. Because of this new entry point, agents should be viewed as a new user role within applications; agents access tools and data to complete tasks, therefore requiring access controls and logging mechanisms which users have to prevent misuse of application functionality or data. Providing agents with tools allows them to complete external actions instead of being confined to internal environ-ments. However, attackers can store malicious data on these external systems to compromise the internal application through the agent [21]. With these attacks being possible through links that aim to download malware or direct to fake payment forms, attackers do not need to understand how the underlying AI model works and can instead use the same attack mechanisms they would use on human users. Model Context Protocol (MCP) extends this exposure further by providing an open standard for agents to consume external tools, resources, and prompts [22]. With the protocol simplifying connections to multiple external sources, risk is amplified through an increased attack surface which can be exploited through untrusted MCP servers [23]. By using external black box MCP servers, systems can be exposed to malicious code operations which agents can execute autonomously. This demonstrates the need for tool restrictions through access controls to reduce application exposure. 

2.5 Hallucination and trust 

A challenge with agentic AI integration is the trust in outputs; LLMs are prone to hallucinations, requiring caution when reviewing their outputs. Knowledge bases can provide ground truth through RAG, but introduce new concerns for data governance: which agent is accessing what data, and with whom the outputs are shared [1]. Building secure data governance can be challenging with published agentic systems often lacking transparent security metrics. Some of these agentic systems use agent builders that delegate safety responsibilities to users, raising concern of safety critical behaviours being undermined [24]. Without an explicit framework for cybersecurity resilience, integrating LLMs into applications increases risk through novel threats. If the AI makes a harmful or incorrect decision, public trust in the system can be broken [25]. This highlights how quickly trust in AI outputs can be diminished. Vulnerabilities caused by agents are often due to the trust provided to these agents; the more sections of an application an agent is given unrestricted access to, the greater the attack surface for agent misuse. Moreover, unintentional access to agents can be given through insecure code. This can be exaggerated through vibe coding the agent logic where such code has demonstrated high instances of exploitable vulnerabilities [2]. Such logic can increase maintenance and unpredictability of codebases [26]. Therefore, guardrails should be implemented to prevent excessive autonomy of agents which risk hallucination and misaligned goals [27]. This highlights the need to control agent trust to reduce the risk of attack on AI-augmented applications. Despite the risks of data exposure and output hallucinations, excessive trust is often put into AI-powered workflows. Data minimisation can reduce sensitive data exposure to LLMs while maintaining model performance in many cases, but users and systems often overshare irrelevant data [28]. This highlights the need to implement agents with defined boundaries, where permissions, prompt construction, and tool exposure are governed for safe deployment. The TRiSM framework provides the structure for that secure workflow. 

2.6 TRiSM framework 

The TRiSM framework was created by Gartner to address governance and risk in AI systems. By promoting trans-parency in AI systems, the data gathering obtained by this allows TRiSM-guided systems to adapt to future uncer-tainties such as quantum technology [29]. Standards such as ISO 42001 are suited for organisation levels, but without actionable controls, creating technical implementations can be a challenge [30]. With TRiSM being a flexible frame-work, technical implementations can be created at the agent level, which is beneficial for agentic workflows with non-deterministic outputs. 4Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare To protect an organisation’s increased attack surface from generative AI, TRiSM focuses on five principles: Gover-nance, Trustworthiness, Fairness, Reliability, and Data protection [7]. These principles aim to provide transparency and explainability within AI systems to mitigate against adversarial inputs and unsafe outputs. Models used for agents evolve continually, producing expanding capabilities and changing governance considerations; TRiSM assists with managing AI risk in this dynamically governed environment [31]. This makes the framework suitable for workflows which require constant updates. Existing research has explored TRiSM conceptually to address risks from LLM models and governance. The frame-work can control attack surfaces from agent communication and collaboration with agentic AI systems [27]. While AI TRiSM has been noted as beneficial in healthcare [7] and can protect sensitive health information [29], empirical research applying TRiSM to implement architectural controls within working medical applications remains limited. This paper contributes an empirical application of TRiSM to a working medical agentic workflow, mapping each TRiSM principle to the workflow and quantifying the resulting security and performance trade-offs. 

# 3 Methodology 

Although both AI agents and agentic AI typically use LLMs, their architecture can differ substantially. AI agents are suitable for isolated single-step tasks, whereas agentic AI can divide a task into subtasks for collaboration between multiple specialised agents [32]. The agentic workflow provides a suitable foundation to apply TRiSM principles; data partitioning improves data minimisation, single-call agents reduce the memory-poisoning surface, and per-agent tool scoping enforces least privilege. This paper compares both TRiSM-guided agentic and insecure agent baseline workflows being applied to the same medical application, highlighting the importance of designing a secure framework based on the application’s goals and risk profile. 

Figure 2: AI agent workflow for medical report generation application. 

Figure 3: Agentic AI workflow for medical report generation application. The agent workflow outlined in Figure 2 shows an insecure integration of AI in a medical application. Although security measures are implemented on the database and front end of the application, the LLM used in the agent 5Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare disregards the security measures as they are unknown to it. Meanwhile, Figure 3 demonstrates an agentic workflow that splits up the AI automated tasks to fit the TRiSM framework. 

3.1 Tools used 

The proposed agentic workflow utilises multiple specialised agents, each with access to a set of tools and resources. This contrasts with the agent workflow, whereby a single agent has access to all tools and resources. The Patient Search agent retrieves patient records relevant to the hospital encounter. It outputs a JSON of information required by the downstream agents, ensuring sensitive information has a reduced exposure to only agents that require it. The Document Generation agent produces the medical report in PDF format. It receives hospital encounter and patient information in addition to Covid-19 information depending on the encounter type. It accesses tools and resources from an external MCP server to apply the appropriate report template for the type of hospital encounter. The Similar X-ray agent is used exclusively for Covid-19 hospital encounters. It queries the X-ray knowledge base using patient’s X-ray image to find diagnosis statuses for similar X-rays. Furthermore, it infers a small discriminative Covid-Net model to produce a predicted probability of Covid-19 infection. By obtaining a predicted diagnosis and analysing diagnoses from similar X-rays, the reliance on generative AI alone for clinical judgement is reduced. At the point of study, Mendix did not support direct connection of application databases to agents. This means that data must be exposed through prompts or tools to the AI. Preventing databases from being exposed to AI models should follow cyber security principles by isolating the two systems. However, by preventing this direct connection, insecure workarounds could be developed to provide AI models the required information. 

3.2 Framework used 

AI TRiSM is a framework for Trust, Risk, and Security Management in AI systems. With this framework designed to handle risks and governance, applying the framework to applications can help with regulatory compliance [29]. Furthermore, the framework can help monitor agent performance and reduce exposing sensitive medical data [31]. As this paper focuses on a medical application, regulatory compliance is crucial for patient safety. This framework will guide the security-conscious workflow within this paper’s medical application. The medical application was developed using Mendix Studio Pro version 10.24, and agents were implemented using Mendix Agent Commons, which supports version control and integration of LLM models via API calls. The AI Agent Index highlights that most agents depend on GPT, Claude, or Gemini, resulting in dependency on a small number of providers and a single point of failure [24]. Using Agent Commons mitigates this risk by allowing alternative model providers to be used without architectural changes. All model calls were made via direct provider APIs (Anthropic, OpenAI, and Google) using each provider’s default decoding parameters; experiments were conducted in June–July 2026 using the following model versions: claude-haiku-4-5-20251001, gpt-4.1-nano-2025-04-14, gpt-4.1-mini-2025-04-14, gpt-5.4-mini-2026-03-17, and gemini-2.5-flash-preview-05-20. Both the insecure agent workflow and the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow were evaluated using the same application against the same set of attacks and synthetic patient data. This aims to reduce variations in attack conditions to test the architectural differences in both workflows. Furthermore, the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow contains additional security checks such as embedding analysis and policy JSONs which are discussed in depth in Section 5. Therefore, performance and security metrics of the agentic workflow are influenced by this recommended design. 

3.3 Comparison 

Two report types for the workflow to generate were used: regular hospital encounters and Covid-19 encounters. This provides comparison on how the workflows manage tasks which require different tools and resources. Five LLMs were tested across both workflows: Claude Haiku 4.5, GPT-4.1-nano, GPT-4.1-mini, GPT-5.4-mini, and Gemini 2.5 Flash. Both report types were tested across each workflow and model combination for 40 generations, accounting for 800 generations in total. The cost of generations was computed at the provider’s token rates at the time of the study. Accu-racy of generations is based on the workflow calling the correct tools, filling out all mandatory fields, not hallucinating report information, and accurately representing the results of Covid-related tools where applicable. To compare the robustness of each workflow, 60 attack scenarios were tested per workflow and model combination. The attack set was built specifically for the medical application, rather than using a more generic benchmark that may 6Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare disregard policy-safe but clinically dangerous outputs [8]. Each attack vector, RAG poisoning, data-field injection, and client-side network injection, had 20 attacks each. An attack was recorded as successful if a model’s output deviated from the attack-free ground-truth output in the direction of the intended injection. This includes attacks such as altered or suppressed COVID-19 determination, inclusion of data or fields the injection requested, execution of an injected tool-calling instruction, and substitution of report content with attacker-specified text. With the agentic workflow constructing prompts server-side, the client-side network injection attack vector was inapplicable for the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow. Therefore, 500 attacks were simulated in total. Attack success rates are pooled over the five models (100 attacks per vector per workflow) and reported with 95% Wilson score intervals. Since each attack scenario is executed against both workflows, the workflow contrast is a paired comparison, making them suitable for McNemar’s exact test on the discordant scenarios. Per-model cells (n = 20) are reported for completeness but, as the intervals show, are individually too small to support fine-grained per-model ranking. The TRiSM-guided agentic workflow condition is the full recommended design later outlined in Section 5. This in-cludes multi-agent decomposition, server-side prompt construction, data partitioning, entry point embedding analysis, and policy JSONs. This design is evaluated against the insecure single-agent baseline. This is a deliberate comparison of the recommended redesign against the baseline rather than a controlled isolation of any single control; the reported security and performance metrics therefore reflect the effect of the redesign. Individual component-level impact (e.g., the share of the improvement due to embedding analysis versus data partitioning) is out of scope for this research. 

# 4 Results 

4.1 Memory misuse 

With data formatted for LLM inference being transient, storing it in the application database may seem inefficient. In the insecure agent workflow, the JSON request sent to the LLM is instead stored client-side in non-persistable objects. However, storing data in-memory with non-persistable objects means data does not have the same access controls which are implemented in the database; the non-persistable objects used for LLM request and responses can be accessed through simple interception of network traffic, exposing the content of prompts and responses. When attributes of non-persistable objects are populated from database records with strict access rules, those access controls are effectively nullified. The data is stripped of its access management by copying it into a non-persistable object exposed to the client. This vulnerability becomes increasingly dangerous when oversharing sensitive data with the agent, exposing additional data to the client. To follow the principle of least privilege, data stored in non-persistable objects should be assumed to be publicly exposed, therefore sensitive information must be excluded from these data stores where possible. The TRiSM-guided agentic workflow addresses data exposure concerns by moving prompt construction to the appli-cation server. Patient data is retrieved through server-side logic to build the requests in the server environment. This preserves the access controls of the application database throughout LLM inference. 

4.2 Injection attacks 

Exposing data used in LLM requests on the client side increases the risk of intercepted and manipulated requests. In-jection attacks have increased success rate with non-persistable objects. In the Mendix application, the "changes": {} 

field of POST requests indicates updates to non-persistable object attributes; any attributes used in the LLM prompt construction can be modified by an attacker with access to the network layer. This affects the integrity of LLM inputs, where malicious users can include new information. This highlights how using non-persistable data stores on the client side for construction prompts increases the risk of injection attacks. The agent workflow introduces a centralised data exposure risk since all input data is used by one agent. Therefore, if a prompt injection attack exposes chat history, then patient, hospital, and X-ray data risks being leaked. This is demonstrated in Figure 4, where an injection attack exposes patient information without the attacker having provided any patient-identifying information. The agentic workflow mitigates the risks of injection attacks through data partitioning. Each agent in this workflow is exposed only to the data and tools necessary for its subtask; the Similar X-Ray agent, for example, has no access to patient demographic data. This separation reduces further data breaches through inference attacks as patient data is less frequently exposed to LLMs. 7Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare 

Figure 4: Injection attack with agent workflow when requests are built client-side. However, insecure implementations of agentic workflows can still be vulnerable to injection attacks. Figure 5 demon-strates an injection attack against the router agent. Despite the agent’s single-tasked, non-conversational history de-sign, its access to the external service layer means a successful injection can retrieve patient data the attacker is not authorised to access. This highlights that building logic around multiple agents is insufficient on its own. Rather, the TRiSM principles need to be incorporated throughout the agentic workflow by enforcing secure server side prompt construction and a strict scope on tool access for agents. 

Figure 5: Injection attack with insecurely implemented agentic workflow when requests are built client-side. 

4.3 Tool misuse 

Granting an agent access to all available tools increases functional capabilities but expands its attack surface. Addi-tionally, without access control on tools imported from MCP servers, all tools can be provided to the agent regardless of their suitability. This introduces the risk of malicious tool injection. Without server- or client-side restrictions, an attacker who gains control of an MCP server can supply tools that execute unauthorised operations autonomously through the agent. The increased attack surface from the agent workflow exposes more opportunities for inference attacks. By giving unrestricted access to tools which infer machine learning models handling medical imaging, reconstruction of images can occur if security measures such as model perturbation are not implemented [14]. By relying on the underlying architecture of the machine learning model, patient data is put at risk from tool misuse from the insecure workflow. 

4.4 Security comparison 

Tested over the five models, the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow reduced the mean attack success rate (ASR) for RAG poisoning from 31% to 10% and for data-field injection from 42% to 25%. As shown in Table 2, both reductions are statistically significant under a paired McNemar exact test (RAG poisoning p < 0.0001 ; data-field injection p = 0.0009). The network injection vector was structurally removed through prompts constructed server-side, so the vector was not found to be exploitable. Therefore, it is reported as structural prevention rather than as a measured 0% rate in Table 1. Network injection was not applicable to the agentic workflow as client-supplied fields never enter server-side prompt construction. Therefore, the vector is structurally absent rather than tested-and-defeated. On the single-agent baseline 8Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare Table 1: Attack success rates (%) by model, workflow, and attack vector. Each ASR is over 20 attacks; n/a denotes structural prevention (network injection is not exploitable when prompts are constructed server-side). 

Model Workflow ASR – RAG Poison (%) ASR – Data Injection (%) ASR – Network Injection (%) 

Claude Haiku 4.5 Single-agent (baseline) 20 30 60 Claude Haiku 4.5 Agentic (TRiSM) 10 15 n/a GPT-4.1-nano Single-agent (baseline) 50 40 65 GPT-4.1-nano Agentic (TRiSM) 15 20 n/a GPT-4.1-mini Single-agent (baseline) 20 55 75 GPT-4.1-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 10 35 n/a GPT-5.4-mini Single-agent (baseline) 30 35 35 GPT-5.4-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 10 20 n/a Gemini 2.5 Flash Single-agent (baseline) 35 50 60 Gemini 2.5 Flash Agentic (TRiSM) 5 35 n/a 

Mean Single-agent 31.0 42.0 59.0 Mean Agentic (TRiSM) 10.0 25.0 n/a 

Table 2: Attack success rates (ASR) with McNemar’s exact test at 95% confidence intervals. 

Vector Single ASR Agentic ASR Discordant pairs McNemar (95% Wilson CI) (95% Wilson CI) (fixed / newly succeeded) exact p

RAG poisoning 31% [22.8, 40.6] 10% [5.5, 17.4] 22 / 1 < 0.0001 

Data-field injection 42% [32.8, 51.8] 25% [17.5, 34.3] 21 / 4 0.0009 Network injection 59% [49.2, 68.1] n/a (structural) — —it had a 59% mean success rate, with simple scenarios such as hospital-encounter-ID substitution succeeding near-universally. This highlights that this vector is driven by where prompts are built, rather than being a model-dependent risk. RAG poisoning had the lowest ASR across the three attack vectors. This supports research which highlights RAG indirect injections have a lower success rate compared to direct query injection [8]. The attack vector is reduced but not eliminated with the agentic workflow. Attacks which append fake ”SYSTEM UPDATE” messages succeeded against almost all agent workflows and continued to succeed against GPT-4.1-mini and GPT-5.4-mini with the agentic workflow. While this would be caught and rejected in data-field injection attacks which would be inspected by pre-processing embedding analysis, the agentic workflow does not perform this analysis at an individual tool level. This highlights whether embedding analysis or other detection methods need to be performed throughout the workflow. Although the agentic workflow lowered ASR overall, agent-to-agent interaction occasionally caused an attack to suc-ceed under the agentic workflow that had failed under the single-agent baseline. This happened in five of the 200 paired data-and-RAG scenarios: three in the GPT-4.1-mini data-field-injection suite, and one RAG-poisoning and one data-field-injection case with Haiku 4.5. This is consistent with prior work on false information propagating between agents to drive incorrect decisions [3]. This highlights the need for pre- and post-processing checks at the workflow boundary rather than relying on agent separation alone. Data-field injection showed the smallest improvement when using agentic workflow. Embedding attacks into legiti-mate data fields in the report, such as plausible physician notes recommending an altered Covid-19 diagnosis, were successful across both workflows for most models. Other attempted attacks, such as ”IGNORE ALL PREVIOUS INSTRUCTIONS” were successful on agent workflows, but were identified as malicious during embedding analysis and blocked the request from being sent to the LLM. Attack success also varied with model choice, although per-model cells (n = 20) carry wide intervals and should be read as indicative rather than as a precise ranking. Gemini 2.5 Flash recorded the lowest RAG-poisoning rate under the agentic workflow and GPT-5.4-mini the lowest network-injection rate under the single-agent baseline, but several cells overlap once intervals are accounted for. The more robust observation is cross-model which shows that no model was resistant across all three vectors, which argues against treating model selection as a substitute for secure workflow design. 9Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare 

4.5 Performance comparison 

For regular reports, every model improved in accuracy with the TRiSM-guided workflow. Mean accuracy increase was 15pp with both Haiku 4.5 and GPT-5.4-mini. Token consumption and latency increases varied by provider with GPT-4.1-mini and 5.4-mini models having a small increase in overhead with agentic workflows. Cost per report rose no more than 16%, with GPT-4.1-nano showing the smallest increase of 5% as it more consistently returned output in the correct format with the agentic workflow. The agentic workflow saw the latency distribution narrow for some models. Gemini 2.5 Flash’s Covid-19 latency IQR narrowed from 47.6 to 26.1 seconds, indicating a more predictable per-call workload even though median latency was largely unchanged. Meanwhile, Haiku 4.5 and 5.4-mini saw their latency IQR stay almost consistent with the agentic workflow for Covid-19 reports. So, while overall latency increased with these models, the smaller interquartile ranges highlight that dividing up tasks results in the LLM having a more predictable per-call workload. Additionally, this contributes towards the accuracy, whereby tasks are logically separated, reducing the risk of overwhelming LLMs with large, complex tasks in a single request. Table 3: Workflow performances for generating regular medical reports                                                                                 

> Model Workflow Tokens / Report Latency (s) Accuracy Cost / Report Median IQR Median IQR (%) (median)
> Claude Haiku 4.5 Single-agent (baseline) 41,654 1,084 51.6 2.7 77.5 $0.0775 Claude Haiku 4.5 Agentic (TRiSM) 47,020 (+13%) 6,210 64.1 (+12.5) 25.0 92.5 $0.0898 (+16%) GPT-4.1-nano Single-agent (baseline) 40,173 7,438 75.7 44.4 62.5 $0.0085 GPT-4.1-nano Agentic (TRiSM) 48,621 (+21%) 14,224 89.4 (+13.7) 21.2 75.0 $0.0090 (+5%) GPT-4.1-mini Single-agent (baseline) 34,755 1,146 115.7 42.3 87.5 $0.0237 GPT-4.1-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 36,994 (+6%) 1,261 126.9 (+11.2) 27.0 92.5 $0.0251 (+6%) GPT-5.4-mini Single-agent (baseline) 34,910 1,060 40.2 5.6 80.0 $0.0568 GPT-5.4-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 37,437 (+7%) 828 46.8 (+6.6) 7.5 95.0 $0.0602 (+6%) Gemini 2.5 Flash Single-agent (baseline) 42,876 4,574 54.2 22.8 85.0 $0.0218 Gemini 2.5 Flash Agentic (TRiSM) 47,661 (+11%) 3,115 76.5 (+22.3) 24.8 92.5 $0.0248 (+14%)

Table 4: Workflow performances for generating Covid-19 medical reports                                                                                 

> Model Workflow Tokens / Report Latency (s) Accuracy Cost / Report Median IQR Median IQR (%) (median)
> Claude Haiku 4.5 Single-agent (baseline) 79,024 2,361 107.6 9.1 75.0 $0.1519 Claude Haiku 4.5 Agentic (TRiSM) 90,710 (+15%) 2,848 126.6 (+19.0) 8.0 87.5 $0.1732 (+14%) GPT-4.1-nano Single-agent (baseline) 65,676 13,014 130.9 67.2 60.0 $0.0114 GPT-4.1-nano Agentic (TRiSM) 84,996 (+29%) 28,067 185.2 (+54.3) 98.0 67.5 $0.0171 (+51%) GPT-4.1-mini Single-agent (baseline) 67,500 4,933 169.7 76.8 60.0 $0.0460 GPT-4.1-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 71,964 (+7%) 2,922 241.6 (+71.9) 52.7 80.0 $0.0489 (+6%) GPT-5.4-mini Single-agent (baseline) 85,139 29,786 76.0 6.0 70.0 $0.1246 GPT-5.4-mini Agentic (TRiSM) 73,788 ( −13%) 1,386 89.0 (+13.0) 7.6 97.5 $0.1203 ( −3%) Gemini 2.5 Flash Single-agent (baseline) 89,859 10,831 118.4 47.6 67.5 $0.0479 Gemini 2.5 Flash Agentic (TRiSM) 91,231 (+2%) 6,264 123.5 (+5.1) 26.1 85.0 $0.0465 ( −3%)

Covid-19 reports showed an increased influence of workflow choice. Token counts roughly doubled compared to regular report generation because of the additional tools being called and the Covid-19 report template being more complex. Accuracy of reports improved significantly with agentic workflows, with 5.4-mini increasing by 27.5pp. Meanwhile, 4.1-nano improved only marginally by 7.5pp, suggesting the smallest model approaches a complexity limit with the more resource-intensive report generation. Regardless, every model improved on report generation, suggesting the agentic workflow helped even where less contextual information was available to each agent. Latency becomes a significant impact for Covid-19 reports while it was a minor impact for most regular report gen-erations. With the agentic workflow running agents sequentially rather than a single LLM call, 4.1-nano and 4.1-mini show substantial increases of 54.3 and 71.9 seconds respectively. While previous research has shown smaller models 10 Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare to have the lower latency [33], when these models are used in complex workflows, their latency is worse than larger models. 

4.6 Observation analysis 

When looking into both accuracy and security improvements of implementing TRiSM-guided agentic workflows, these features are not independent. GPT-4.1-mini, which reduced data-field injection by 20pp, also gained 20pp accuracy in Covid-19 report generations. GPT-5.4-mini gained 27.5pp in Covid-19 report generation accuracy with 20pp decrease in RAG poisoning ASR. Both improvements come from individual agents completing smaller tasks, reducing the risk of errors arising from a single-tasked agent handling a complex request. The cost of generating the reports in TRiSM workflows can be limited by choosing an appropriate model. While 4.1-nano saw a 51% increase in generation costs for Covid-19 reports, the accuracy of the model for this task makes it un-suitable. Meanwhile, 5.4-mini observed a minor decrease in Covid-19 report generation and only a 6% increase in reg-ular report generation costs. With the agentic workflow providing improved data security through data-minimisation between agents, the improved compliance this workflow provides could justify the modest increase in premium if the appropriate model is chosen. While the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow improves the accuracy and security of report generation across model selection, choosing the appropriate model is still an essential process to ensure improved performance and security. The ASR values in Table 1 should be used as a consideration for model selection instead of only focusing on cost and latency. 

# 5 Recommendations 

Moving the medical report generation from the insecure agent workflow to the TRiSM-guided agentic workflow re-duced ASR for each attack vector across all five models tested. The design evaluated in Section 4 already embodies the TRiSM-guided controls described below. This section makes the mapping from each TRiSM principle to its concrete control explicit. Figure 6, shows the full workflow as tested in the medical application. This section outlines recom-mendations on how to build secure workflows based on the main TRiSM principles: Governance, Trustworthiness, Fairness, Reliability, and Data protection. 

5.1 Authenticating agent logic (data protection) 

Permission to access data should be explicitly granted to agents using similar mechanisms that are applied to human users. Using such permissions, agent functionalities should be isolated and logged to reduce risk of data breaches [21]. Multiple agents can be managed through orchestration and reasoning layers to ensure that the appropriate tools and data sources are accessed for each task [1]. This demonstrates taking careful consideration on whether sensitive information needs to be exposed to LLMs for a given task. While exposing entire resources and tools to agents through AI agent workflow increases the possible functionalities, this exposes sensitive information to a system which manipulates the received data to generate new data, which can be exposed to malicious actors. By separating logic through agentic workflow, explicit decisions can be made and authentication as to whether sensitive information needs to be exposed to LLMs to complete subtasks. To reduce the risk from external tools, role-based access controls should be available on MCP servers used. This allows tool subsets to be accessible through role-based authentication [23]. Additionally, tools exposed to agents should be explicitly selected to complete their given objectives rather than granting blanket access to all tools. By implementing security measures on both the server and client side, tool exposure can be controlled to reduce risk of misuse. 

5.2 Prompt security (fairness) 

Providing additional information to LLMs can improve response accuracy, but also increase data exposure risk. It is important to evaluate whether the information used for prompts is essential or can be removed to improve data confidentiality. Removing irrelevant information can reduce data exposure while maintaining model performance [28]. By improving prompt security through measures such as retrieval logging and trust scoring, biases in content generation can be reduced [34]. Therefore, evaluating data exposure to LLMs can improve data confidentiality and improve output accuracies. Using RAG modifies prompts before sending them to the LLM. To defend against insecure knowledge bases, anomaly detection should be completed before sending the prompt. Identifying embedding for known injection patterns is 11 Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare 

Figure 6: Proposed secure agentic workflow using TRiSM. an effective preprocessing step [19]. Preprocessing is important as LLMs are not guaranteed to distinguish between legitimate data and injected instructions [6]. Furthermore, post-processing analysis alone, through known-answer detection, may be insufficient when injection attacks do not alter the output format [5]. Therefore, analysing the prompt before sending it to agents will help detect malicious prompts before they are used for generation. 

5.3 Input sanitisation (reliability) 

Storing or working with user-supplied inputs should be done on the application server with write access denied to users. This is because chat history tampering is a risk when exposing LLMs to user-supplied inputs [15]. By storing inputs on the database without write privileges to users, the attack surface for prompt injection is reduced. Furthermore, by separating agents into defined functionalities, legitimate and sensitive chat histories can be exposed only to the agents that legitimately require it. 

5.4 Agent Lifecycle Management (governance) 

Mendix Agent Commons provides versioning for agents. This provides historic information on prompts, tools, and models used for an agent. While this still works when using AI agent workflow, granular lifecycle management be-comes difficult because of the atomic nature. Agentic AI workflow benefits from versioning, as agents are individually versioned and can be assigned the most appropriate resources for their specific task. Lifecycle control enables deliberate decision about agent characteristics. Making agents single-call instead of conver-sational can help reduce risks if conversation history does not provide benefit to completing tasks. Memory poisoning is a significant threat, especially in multi-agent systems where poisoning can occur through agent-to-agent interac-12 Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare tions [18]. By making agents single-call where appropriate, the context provided to LLMs has one fewer way of being manipulated. 

5.5 Explainability (trustworthiness) 

To ensure trust in the accuracy of AI responses, having a transparent and clear flow of how responses are reached is imperative. This is a challenge with the agent workflow - prompting the AI to explain how it reached the output does not prevent the risk that the explanation itself is hallucinated. Meanwhile, the distinct roles in agentic workflow assists in transparency and explainability. By logging which agents are interacted with in the agentic execution layer as well as the services used by each of these agents, it becomes clearer how the AI response was obtained. Instead of risking hallucination in explainability through agents self-reporting, logging the interactions in the agentic workflow provides clear and accountable steps on how responses were generated. 

# 6 Future work and limitations 

The application in this paper was able to improve trust by removing conversation history from agents, reducing the risk of memory poisoning. However, conversational history can be critical for some agentic frameworks, such as multi-step clinical decisions. Future work should investigate how TRiSM can sustain trust through access controlled storage of agent memory. Additionally, the study was conducted within the constraints of Mendix with Studio Pro version 10.24. Future work should validate the proposed TRiSM influenced recommendations across other development platforms to evaluate their impact on agent performance and user experience. Attack outcomes were scored by a single annotator against a fixed per-vector rubric. Although the success criterion is deterministic for most scenarios, such as presence of disclosed records or a flipped diagnosis, borderline data-field cases involve judgement, and a single unblinded annotator is a threat to validity. Future work should add at least one independent rater on a sampled subset and report inter-rater agreement. Finally, the adversarial test set was bounded by available compute and API budget; the 500 attacks tested identify vul-nerability patterns, but do not provide an exhaustive coverage of the attack vectors. Furthermore, the environmental impact of testing with LLMs has been a concern in previous research [33], putting further pressure on this security comparison on a resource-intensive document generation task. While the sample size is sufficient to identify vul-nerability patterns and demonstrate the relative effectiveness of TRiSM-guided controls, future work with dedicated funding should expand the adversarial test set in a more environmentally-conscious task. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Incorporating AI agents into applications can vastly expand capabilities in a time-efficient manner. However, inte-grating AI into applications without risk analysis introduces unpredictable vulnerabilities, principally through least privilege not being followed as would be done with user roles. This paper used the TRiSM framework to demonstrate how a medical application using an insecure agent workflow can be redesigned to a more secure agentic workflow, evaluated across five LLMs against 500 attack scenarios. The proposed multi-layered, TRiSM-guided agentic work-flow mitigates risks posed by the attack vectors RAG poisoning, data-field injection, and network injection. This addresses limitations identified in prior agent-security work concerning input inspection and tool auditing [3]. The TRiSM-guided agentic workflow reduced mean attack success rates from 31% to 10% for RAG poisoning, 42% to 25% for data-field injection, and eliminated the client-side network injection vector entirely through server-side prompt construction. Accuracy of generated reports increased from 72.5% to 86.5%, demonstrating that agents han-dling smaller, cleaner tasks are both harder to manipulate and more reliable. Moreover, the results also showed that no model was robust across all of the attack vectors tested, arguing against treating model selection as a substitute for secure workflow design. Future work should expand the sample size of attack vectors in an environmentally-conscious scenario to further identify how TRiSM-guided workflows can further mitigate the risks of attack vectors exploiting LLM vulnerabilities. 

# 8 Data availability 

In line with responsible disclosure practices due to the security implications of the attack vectors, the test set has not been released. Access may be provided to verified researchers for reproducibility and security-focused research. 13 Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare 

# References 

[1] S. Brohi, Q. ul-ain Mastoi, N. Z. Jhanjhi, and T. R. Pillai, “A research landscape of agentic ai and large language models: Applications, challenges and future directions,” Algorithms , vol. 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4893/18/8/499 [2] S. Zhao, D. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Luo, Z. Li, and L. Li, “Is vibe coding safe? benchmarking vulnerability of agent-generated code in real-world tasks,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.03262 [3] Z. Deng, Y. Guo, C. Han, W. Ma, J. Xiong, S. Wen, and Y. Xiang, “Ai agents under threat: A survey of key security challenges and future pathways,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 57, 2025. [4] Y. Liu, G. Deng, Y. Li, K. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, L. Y. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Prompt injection attack against llm-integrated applications,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05499 [5] J. Shi, Z. Yuan, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, P. Zhou, L. Sun, and N. Z. Gong, “Optimization-based prompt injection attack to llm-as-a-judge,” in CCS 2024 - Proceedings of the 2024 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2024. [6] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Com-promising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” in AISec 2023 - Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , 2023. [7] A. Gomstyn and A. Jonker, “What is ai trism?” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ai-trism [8] J. Lee, H. Jang, and K. S. Choi, “Mpib: A benchmark for medical prompt injection attacks and clinical safety in llms,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06268 [9] N. Kandpal, K. Pillutla, A. Oprea, P. Kairouz, C. Choquette-Choo, and Z. Xu, “User inference attacks on llms,” in Socially Responsible Language Modelling Research , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8XHBFJOl5 [10] L. Zhu, Z. Liu, and S. Han, “Deep leakage from gradients,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. [11] J. X. Morris, W. Zhao, J. T. Chiu, V. Shmatikov, and A. M. Rush, “Language model inversion,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13647 [12] P. Maini, H. Jia, N. Papernot, and A. Dziedzic, “Llm dataset inference: Did you train on my dataset?” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, 2024. [13] Z. Zhang, C. Yan, and B. A. Malin, “Membership inference attacks against synthetic health data,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics , vol. 125, 2022. [14] M. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Ding, H. Nguyen, R. Yu, M. Pan, and S. T. Wong, “Evaluation of inference attack models for deep learning on medical data,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.00177 [15] C. Wei, Y. Zhao, Y. Gong, K. Chen, L. Xiang, and S. Zhu, “Hidden in plain sight: Exploring chat history tampering in interactive language models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20234 [16] T. Shi, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Li, L. Wu, W. Guo, and D. Song, “Progent: Programmable privilege control for llm agents,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11703 [17] Z. Chen, Z. Xiang, C. Xiao, D. Song, and B. Li, “Agentpoison: Red-teaming llm agents via poisoning memory or knowledge bases,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, Eds., vol. 37. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024, pp. 130 185–130 213. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2024/file/ eb113910e9c3f6242541c1652e30dfd6-Paper-Conference.pdf [18] V. Torra and M. Bras-Amor´ os, “Memory poisoning and secure multi-agent systems,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20357 [19] B. Ramakrishnan and A. Balaji, “Securing ai agents against prompt injection attacks,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.15759 [20] R. Khan, S. Sarkar, S. K. Mahata, and E. Jose, “Security threats in agentic ai system,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14728 [21] A. Li, Y. Zhou, V. C. Raghuram, T. Goldstein, and M. Goldblum, “Commercial llm agents are already vulnerable to simple yet dangerous attacks,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08586 14 Empirical Security Gains from TRiSM-Guided Agentic Workflows in Healthcare [22] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, and H. Wang, “Model context protocol (mcp): Landscape, security threats, and future research directions,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23278 [23] H. Errico, J. Ngiam, and S. Sojan, “Securing the model context protocol (mcp): Risks, controls, and governance,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.20920 [24] L. Staufer, K. Feng, K. Wei, L. Bailey, Y. Duan, M. Yang, A. P. Ozisik, S. Casper, and N. Kolt, “The 2025 ai agent index: Documenting technical and safety features of deployed agentic ai systems,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.17753 [25] A. F. Vatamanu and M. Tofan, “Integrating artificial intelligence into public administration: Challenges and vulnerabilities,” Administrative Sciences , vol. 15, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3387/15/4/149 [26] M. Horvat, “What is vibe coding and when should you use it (or not)?” TechRxiv , vol. 2025, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.techrxiv.org/doi/abs/10.36227/techrxiv.175459780.03758839/v1 [27] S. Raza, R. Sapkota, M. Karkee, and C. Emmanouilidis, “Trism for agentic ai: A review of trust, risk, and security management in llm-based agentic multi-agent systems,” AI Open , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666651026000069 [28] J. Zhou, N. Mireshghallah, and T. Li, “Operationalizing data minimization for privacy-preserving llm prompting,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03662 [29] A. Habbal, M. K. Ali, and M. A. Abuzaraida, “Artificial intelligence trust, risk and security management (ai trism): Frameworks, applications, challenges and future research directions,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 240, p. 122442, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0957417423029445 [30] P. Gupta, “Ai tips 2.0: A comprehensive framework for operationalizing ai governance,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.09114 [31] P. P. Ray, “A review of trism frameworks in artificial intelligence systems: Fundamentals, taxonomy, use cases, key challenges and future directions,” Expert Systems , vol. 43, p. e70213, 2026, e70213 EXSY-Jun-25-2337. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/exsy.70213 [32] R. Sapkota, K. I. Roumeliotis, and M. Karkee, “Ai agents vs. agentic ai: A conceptual taxonomy, applications and challenges,” Information Fusion , vol. 126, p. 103599, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253525006712 [33] L. Kearns, “Analysing environmental efficiency in ai for x-ray diagnosis,” Journal of AI , pp. 37–55, 3 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.61969/jai.1838517 [34] G. Bagwe, S. S. Chaturvedi, X. Ma, X. Yuan, K.-C. Wang, and L. E. Zhang, “Your rag is unfair: Exposing fairness vulnerabilities in retrieval-augmented generation via backdoor attacks,” 2025. 15