Title: Privacy-Preserving and Verifiable Approximate Distributed Coded Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02187v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 01:07:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Privacy-Preserving and Verifiable Approximate Distributed Coded Computing 

Xavier Martínez-Luaña , Alba Gude-Santos , Manuel Fernández-Veiga Senior Member, IEEE , Rebeca P. Díaz-Redondo Senior Member, IEEE ,

Abstract —Distributed machine learning enables collaborative model training without centralizing data, but it also exposes learning processes to privacy leakage and malicious manip-ulation. Existing defenses typically address these threats in isolation and are often tailored to specific learning paradigms or model architectures, limiting their applicability in realistic deployments. In particular, federated learning and decentralized learning exhibit distinct adversarial surfaces that are rarely addressed within a unified framework. In this paper, we present a model-agnostic framework for adversary-resistant distributed learning that jointly addresses privacy preservation and mali-cious behavior across both federated and decentralized settings. Our approach combines paradigm-specific defense mechanisms with GPBACC, a privacy-enhancing coded computing technique applicable to arbitrary machine learning models. For federated learning, we integrate robust aggregation strategies to mitigate the impact of malicious participants, while for decentralized learning we employ approximate decode-and-compare and group testing techniques to enable lightweight verification and adver-sary isolation without relying on a trusted aggregator. Crucially, we evaluate the proposed framework through an explicit, attack-driven analysis. We implement representative privacy attacks and malicious behaviors, and empirically demonstrate that the com-bination of GPBACC with robust aggregation and verification mechanisms significantly reduces privacy leakage and improves resilience against active adversaries. These results suggest that privacy-enhancing coded computing, when combined with appro-priate adversary-resistance strategies, provides a practical and deployable foundation for secure distributed machine learning. 

Index Terms —Coded Distributed Computing, Privacy, Feder-ated Learning, Secure Multi-Party Computation, Decentralized Computation, Non-Linearity, Verifiability, Attacks, Decode-and-Compare, Group Testing, Poissoning Attacks, Membership In-ference Attacks. 

X. Martínez-Luaña and A. Gude-Santos are with the Galician Research and Development Center in Advanced Telecommunications (GRADIANT) Estrada do Vilar, 56-58, Vigo, 36214, Spain. Email: xmartinez@gradiant.org X. Martínez-Luaña, R. P. Díaz-Redondo, and M. Fernández-Veiga are with atlanTTic, Information & Computing Lab (ICLAB), Telecommunication Engineering School, Universidade de Vigo Vigo, 36310, Spain. Emails: xamartinez@alumnado.uvigo.gal, rebeca@det.uvigo.es, mveiga@det.uvigo.es This work was partially funded by the European Union’s Horizon Eu-rope Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Action under project TRUSTED (proj. no. 101168467), the grant DISCOVERY (PID2023-148716OB-C31) funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and FEDER, "TRUFFLES: TRUsted Framework for Federated LEarning Systems, within the strategic cybersecurity projects (INCIBE, Spain), funded by the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan (European Union, Next Generation)". Additionally, it also has and it also has been funded by the Galician Regional Government under project ED431B 2024/41 (GPC). Funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Distributed and collaborative machine learning have become a cornerstone of modern data-driven systems, enabling multi-ple participants to jointly train models without centralizing raw data. Paradigms such as Federated Learning (FL) and Decen-tralized Learning (DL) are increasingly adopted in privacy-sensitive and large-scale environments, including healthcare, finance, and industrial systems. However, despite the inherent increase in privacy protection, neither paradigm fully avoids privacy and security issues, and both expose learning processes to privacy leakage and malicious manipulation [1], [2]. Existing protection mechanisms typically address these threats in isolation. One strategy is to use Privacy-Enhancing Technologies (PETs), including homomorphic encryption [3] and secure multi-party computation [4], which provide strong theoretical guarantees but often incur prohibitive computa-tional and communication overheads, limiting their deploya-bility in realistic learning scenarios. On the other hand, robust aggregation techniques [5] and anomaly detection methods [6] aim to mitigate poisoning and Byzantine attacks, yet they rarely address the problem of privacy leakage, nor are they easily transferable across different learning architectures and deployment models. Moreover, most prior work focuses predominantly on feder-ated learning [7] with a central aggregator, while decentralized learning [8], [9], where data is exchanged instead of model updates, remains comparatively underexplored from a unified adversarial-resilience perspective. This fundamental difference exacerbates both privacy and integrity risks, demanding fun-damentally different verification and defense mechanisms. Consequently, practical adversary resistance in distributed learning requires a comprehensive approach that jointly ad-dresses privacy and malicious behavior across both learning paradigms (FL and DL), without restricting applicability to specific model architectures. To this end, we introduce a unified framework that combines complementary adversary-resistance strategies for both paradigms, enabled by our pre-vious research work on Generalized Privacy-aware Berrut Approximated Coded Computing (GPBACC [10]) as a PET agnostic to the AI model and the learning strategy. GPBACC is a privacy-preserving extension of Berrut Approximated Coded Computing [11], a scheme from the Coded Distributed Computing domain that allows to distributedly approximate any arbitrary function while resisting stragglers. Built upon this technological foundation, our framework integrates robust aggregation strategies tailored to federated 

> arXiv:2607.02187v1 [cs.LG] 2 Jul 2026 2

learning settings, as well as approximate decode-and-compare (DC) mechanisms combined with group testing techniques for decentralized learning environments. Both mechanisms are deliberately designed to address the distinct threat models inherent to each paradigm while preserving architectural gen-erality. Additionally, our contributions extend beyond design and integration. Rather than assuming privacy or robustness by construction, we provide a practical, attack-driven evalua-tion of the proposed framework. We explicitly implement and evaluate representative privacy attacks and malicious be-haviors, empirically demonstrating how the combination of GPBACC with paradigm-specific adversary-resistance mecha-nisms achieves both privacy preservation and resilience against active adversaries. Thus, the main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:  

> •

Definition of a unified adversary-resilient framework for distributed learning that jointly addresses privacy leakage and malicious behavior across both federated learning and decentralized learning settings.  

> •

Specifically for federated learning architectures, we pro-pose combining GPBACC with robust aggregation strate-gies, while preserving its model-agnostic nature.  

> •

Specifically for decentralized learning architectures, we propose complementing GPBACC with (i) approximate decode-and-compare techniques, and (ii) group testing techniques, while preserving its model-agnostic nature.  

> •

Evaluation of the global framework for both privacy preservation and resistance to malicious participants using practical attack-based tests. To sum up, by bridging privacy enhancement and adver-sarial robustness across learning paradigms, our proposal con-tributes toward deployable, architecture-independent defenses for real-world distributed machine learning systems. The structure of the paper is as follows. After summarizing and critically reviewing the state of the art (Sect. II), we provide a brief overview of the technical background required to introduce our proposal (Sect. III). The threat model assump-tions are detailed in Sect. IV, while the mechanisms designed to enhance adversary resistance are presented in Sect. V. Finally, we thoroughly discuss the validation results (Sect. VI) and conclude with a brief section on conclusions and future work (Sect. VII). II. R ELATED WORK 

This work lies at the intersection of privacy-preserving machine learning, adversarially robust distributed learning, and coded computing. Accordingly, we organize the related literature along four main research directions. First, we review privacy-enhancing technologies for distributed learning, which aim to protect sensitive information during model training. Second, we examine prior work on robust aggregation mecha-nisms in federated learning, designed to mitigate the impact of faulty or malicious participants. Third, we discuss approaches addressing adversary-resistant decentralized learning, with a focus on resilience against adversarial behaviors in fully dis-tributed settings. Finally, we survey recent advances in coded computing techniques applied to machine learning, which seek to improve robustness and efficiency in distributed training. Although we include a brief comparison between existing state-of-the-art approaches and our proposed solution, it is worth emphasizing that this paper introduces a unified, attack-validated framework that combines model-agnostic privacy-enhancing coded computing with paradigm-specific adversary-resistance mechanisms. In contrast to prior work in this field, which typically addresses privacy, robustness, or decentraliza-tion in isolation, our approach provides a common framework that explicitly faces privacy leakage and malicious behavior under realistic attack scenarios. 

A. Privacy-Enhancing Technologies for Distributed Learning 

A substantial body of work has explored the use of crypto-graphic Privacy-Enhancing Technologies to protect distributed learning. Homomorphic encryption enables training over en-crypted data or model updates, providing strong theoretical privacy guarantees [12], [13]. The application of these tech-niques to federated learning architectures has been recently analyzed in the literature [3], considering approaches based on either single keys [14] or multiple keys [15]. Secure multi-party computation has similarly been applied to federated learning to prevent information leakage during the aggre-gation process [4], [12], [16]. Some of these approaches have been successfully applied across different application do-mains, including finance [17], mobile networks [18], and IoT-enabled manufacturing [19]. However, these approaches often incur significant computational and communication overheads, which limit scalability and practical deployment, particularly for large models or resource- constrained environments. Differential privacy has also been widely adopted to miti-gate information leakage in federated learning. In particular, several approaches perturb model updates or gradients to provide formal privacy guarantees [20]. These techniques have been applied across a wide range of application domains, including the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [21] and personal-ized services [22]. While differential privacy provides formal guarantees, it introduces a privacy–utility trade-off and does not inherently address malicious manipulation or Byzantine behavior. Moreover, privacy guarantees typically degrade un-der repeated training rounds or adaptive adversaries [20]. In contrast to the aforementioned cryptographic- or noise-based approaches, coded computing techniques introduce structural obfuscation through information mixing and approx-imation. These methods provide privacy-enhancing properties without relying on heavy cryptographic primitives, making them attractive for deployable systems. Our work builds on this line by integrating GPBACC as a model-agnostic PET and validating its privacy properties empirically under explicit attacks. 

B. Robust Aggregation in Federated Learning 

Federated learning is particularly vulnerable to poisoning and Byzantine attacks due to its reliance on distributed client updates. Robust aggregation techniques such as Krum, Multi-Krum, Trimmed Mean, and coordinate-wise median have 3

been proposed to mitigate the impact of malicious partic-ipants [23], [24]. Subsequent work has explored adaptive and statistically robust variants, as well as defenses against backdoor attacks [5], [25]. Some initiatives perform well under IID settings, but their performance degrades in non-IID scenarios [26]. Other approaches have been tailored for secure hardware architectures, such as Intel SGX [27], or have been specifically designed for industrial environments [28]. While these methods claims to improve robustness, they are typically designed independently of privacy considerations and assume access to raw or lightly processed model updates. As a result, they remain susceptible to privacy inference attacks and are tightly coupled to specific aggregation settings. In this work, we do not propose new robust aggregation rules; instead, we combine existing robust aggregation strategies with GPBACC to jointly address privacy leakage and malicious behavior in federated learning. 

C. Adversary Resistance in Decentralized Learning 

Decentralized learning, where there is not a master element that owns the data, removes the central aggregation point and, consequently, complicates adversary detection and verification. Prior work on decentralized gossip-based learning has focused primarily on convergence and scalability, often under benign assumptions [29]. Byzantine-resilient decentralized learning has received comparatively less attention, and existing solu-tions [6], [30] frequently rely on strong assumptions about network connectivity or honest majorities. Verification-based approaches, including consistency checks and redundancy, have been explored to detect faulty or ma-licious participants in distributed systems [31]. Group testing techniques have been applied in other domains to efficiently identify adversarial actors with limited overhead [32]. Our work adapts these ideas to decentralized learning by com-bining approximate decode-and-compare with group testing, enabled by the coded structure introduced through GPBACC. This allows adversary detection and isolation without requiring full decoding or a trusted coordinator. 

D. Coded Computing for Machine Learning 

Coded computing has been extensively studied as a means to mitigate stragglers and failures in distributed computa-tion [33]–[35], while some are able to ensure privacy guar-antees [36], [37]. Some work has applied coding techniques directly to machine learning workloads, including gradient coding [38]. These approaches primarily target efficiency and fault tolerance, with privacy considered as a secondary or implicit benefit, and only work with specific classes of functions, which reduces its usability in common ML. Berrut-based rational approximations have been explored for their numerical stability and efficiency in interpolation tasks [39], being BACC [11] the most notorious scheme, capable of distributing the computation of arbitrary functions while resisting stragglers. Our previous research work, Gener-alized Privacy-aware Berrut Approximated Coded Computing (GPBACC) [10], was built on these foundations to enable Master     

> BACC
> Encoding
> Compute
> Master
> BACC
> Compute
> Compute
> Node 1 Node 2 Node
> Decoding
> Data
> Encode Share Compute Collect Decode

Fig. 1: Phases of the BACC scheme. generalized approximate coded computation suitable for ma-chine learning. Unlike prior coded computing approaches, we emphasize GPBACC as a privacy-enhancing primitive and demonstrates how it can be combined with adversary-resistance mechanisms across both federated and decentralized learning paradigms. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Generalized Privacy-aware Berrut Approximated Coded Computing (GPBACC) 

The Berrut Approximated Coded Computing (BACC) scheme [11] enables the distributed computation of an ar-bitrary objective function f : V → U over input data 

X = ( X0, . . . , X K−1), where U and V are vector spaces of real matrices. The scheme operates on a network composed of one master node (data owner) who commissions N worker nodes the task of computing f (X) =  f (X0), . . . , f (XK−1).Specifically, BACC approximates 

˜f (X) ≈  f (X0), f (X1), . . . , f (XK−1)

in each component with bounded numerical error, offering stability even for large numbers of workers. It tolerates strag-glers, as the approximation error depends on the number of received results, and can represent not only polynomial functions but also other arbitrary functions f under mild regularity assumptions too [40]. The protocol proceeds through three phases, as shown in Figure 1: 

a) Encoding and Sharing: The master node encodes the data vector X using a rational interpolation function based on the Berrut barycentric formulation. Given a vector 

α = ( α0, . . . , α K−1) of distinct interpolation points, define the rational functions 

˜q(αi, z ) := (−1) i

z − αi

, Q(α, z ) := 

> K−1

X

> i=0

˜q(αi, z ),

and let q(αi, z ) = ˜ q(αi, z )/Q (z,). The Berrut rational inter-polation is 

u(z) = 

> K−1

X

> i=0

q(αi, z ) Xi, (1) where α are selected as the Chebyshev points of the first kind αj = Re  exp ((2 j + 1) π/ (2 K)) , j = 0 , . . . , K − 1.It follows by direct substitution that u(αj ) = Xj , ∀j.Then, N encoder mapping points β = {β0, . . . , β N −1} are chosen equal to the Chebyshev points of the second kind: 

βj = Re  exp jπ/ (N − 1) , j = 0 , . . . , N − 1. The master 4

evaluates u(βj ) for each βj and sends this encoded share to worker j.

b) Computation and Communication: Each worker j

computes the result vj = f  u(βj ) and sends it back to the master node. 

c) Decoding: Upon receiving the first n responses from the nodes F ⊂ [N ], |F| = n, the master node reconstructs the approximated outputs through the Berrut rational interpolation 

rBerrut ,F (z) = 

> n

X

> i=0

q(βi, z ) f  u( ˜βi), (2) where ˜βi ∈ S = {cos jπ N −1 , j ∈ F} . The master estimates 

f (Xi) ≈ rBerrut ,F (αi), for all i ∈ [0 , K − 1] .A weakness of BACC for FL and DL workflows is that any node able to observe the encoded shares can infer in-formation about X, that is, no privacy guarantee exists. The Privacy-Aware extension of BACC solves this problem with the introduction of Gaussian random terms into the encoding process. In PBACC the encoding function is given by 

u(z) =  

> K+T−1

X

> i=0

q(αi, z )Wi, (3) where Wi = Xi for i = 0 , . . . , K − 1 and Wi = Ri−K

for i = K, . . . , T − 1 and {Ri} are iid random sam-ples drawn from N (0 , σ 2

> n

/T ). The data interpolation points 

{α0, . . . , α K−1} are as in GBACC, while the noise points 

{αK , . . . , α K+T −1} are shifted Chebyshev points αK+j =

b + Re  exp (2 j + 1) π/ (2 T ), for j = 0 , . . . , T − 1, where 

b ∈ R defines the shift. Neither Berrut coded computing nor its private version PBACC support multi-source configurations and tensor data, and cannot be used directly in many machine learning com-puting tasks. Generalized PBACC (GPBACC) extends the encoding mapping so that its range accepts arbitrary-rank inputs. Consider N nodes, each in possession of a private data tensor X(i) 

> k0k1...k L−1

∈ RK×k1×···× kL−1 , where i indexes the data owner and L denotes the tensor rank. In GPBACC, the encoding operation for node i is performed as 

uX(i) (z) = 

> K−1

X

> j=0

q(αj , z ) X(i)

> jk 1...k L−1

+ 

> T−1

X

> j=0

q(αK+j , z ) R(i) 

> jk 1...k L−1

,

(4) where αj are the interpolation points as before, and 

R(i) 

> jk 1...k L−1

∼ N (0 , σ 2

> n

/T ) are random tensors. The func-tion uX(i) (z) is evaluated at βj = cos 

 jπ N −1



, the Chebyshev points of the second kind, producing shares 

uX(i) (βj ) distributed to all nodes. Each node i computes 

f  uX(0) (βi), u X(1) (βi), . . . , u X(N −1) (βi) and sends the result to the master node, which reconstructs the outputs using the Berrut decoder 

rBerrut ,F (z) = 

> n

X

> i=0

q(βi, z ) f  uX(0) ( ˜βi), . . . , u X(N −1) ( ˜βi),

(5) where ˜βi ∈ S = {cos jπ N −1 , j ∈ F} are the evaluation points of the fastest nodes. Finally, the master approximates 

f  X(0)  

> jk 1...k L−1

, . . . , X (N −1) 

> jk 1...k L−1

 ≈ rBerrut ,F (αj ), (6) for all j ∈ [0 , K − 1] .

B. Privacy metric and Privacy Guarantees 

We adopt an information–theoretic leakage metric based on the worst-case achievable mutual information for a subset of c colluding semi-honest nodes. A semi-honest node is any participant in the system that follows the rules of the computing protocol but it is interested in obtaining the original input X by processing the messages exchanged during the execution of the distributed computation. To derive the information-theoretic bounds, we recall that the encoding process is analogous to an equivalent Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) channel with K transmitter antennas (the encoded input components) and c receiver antennas (the colluding nodes) [41]. Following this formulation, the injected Gaussian noise of GPBACC acts as additive channel noise that limits the information capacity of the system. Assuming that the encoded noise is independent and identically distributed according to N (0 , σ 2

> n

/T ), the system can be viewed as an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) vector channel. The capacity C of this MIMO channel is by definition an upper-bound on the mutual information between the transmit-ted signal X and the received signal Y, and it is given by 

C = sup 

> PX

I(Y; X) = log 2 Ic + P H Σ−1 

> Z

H† , (7) where H denotes the encoding matrix, P the maximum transmission power per input, ΣZ the noise covariance matrix, and Ic the c × c identity matrix. The determinant | · | expresses the total channel gain observed by the colluding subset. Leveraging this framework, we define the worst-case achiev-able mutual information IL as the maximum information attainable by any set C ⊂ [N ] colluding workers: 

IL ≜ max  

> C

sup  

> PX:∥Xi∥≤ s

I(YC ; X), (8) where s bounds the magnitude of the input signal. By the power constraint E[∥Xi∥2] ≤ s2, we can write 

IL ≤ max  

> C

sup  

> PX:E[∥Xi∥2]≤s2

I(YC ; X). (9) Combining (7) and (9), the upper bound on the information leakage becomes 

IL ≤ max  

> C

log 2 Ic + s2Tσ2

> n

˜Σ−1 

> C

ΣC , (10) where ΣC and ˜ΣC are the covariance matrices corresponding to the encoded data and noise, respectively: 

ΣC ≜



q0(βi1 ) · · · qK−1(βi1 )

... . . . ...

q0(βic ) · · · qK−1(βic )

 , (11) 5

˜ΣC ≜



qK (βi1 ) · · · qK+T −1(βi1 )

... . . . ...

qK (βic ) · · · qK+T −1(βic )

 , (12) and {βih } being the evaluation points of the colluding nodes. Finally, the privacy metric adopted in this paper is the information leakage normalized per data element 

iL = IL

K . (13) A GPBACC configuration is considered ϵ-secure if iL ≤ ϵ for the given parameters (c, T, σ n). This analytical bound it will be empirically validated in Section VI through the evaluation against robust Membership Inference Attacks. 

C. Verifiable Distributed Computing 1) Decode-and-Compare (DC): The Decode-and-Compare strategy is a classical verification mechanism for distributed coded computing schemes that produces exact reconstructions. It enables the master node to validate the correctness of received intermediate results without requiring cryptographic proofs or redundant recomputation. Let I = {I1, I 2, . . . , I m} denote the set of intermediate results received by the master node from m workers, where each result Ii corresponds to the encoded evaluation f (u(βi)) .Within I, a subset Iv contains the correct results, and a subset 

Ix the incorrect (erroneous or adversarial) results, so I =

Iv ∪ Ix, and Iv ∩ Ix = ∅. Then, the verification principle for DC works as follows. If the coded computing scheme supports exact decoding from any subset of k valid intermediate results, then for m > k the master can form multiple verification sets S ⊆ { 1, . . . , m } of size |S| = m. For each such set 

S, the master reconstructs the final result using the generic reconstruction operator 

rS (z) = Decode  {Ii : i ∈ S}, (14) where Decode (·) represents the interpolation or decoding process of the underlying coded computing scheme. The DC strategy relies on the deterministic nature of rS (·)

to verify the consistency of the computation, since if the de-coding operation is exact and two distinct verification sets S1

and S2 consist only of correct intermediate results, then their independent reconstructions must coincide rS1 (z) = rS2 (z),for every z ∈ Z, where Z is the domain of evaluation (typically the set of decoder points). Hence, in DC the master node tests whether any two reconstructed results match 

∃ S1, S 2 ⊆ { 1, . . . , m }, |S1| = |S2| = m : rS1 (z) = rS2 (z)

(15) for all z ∈ Z . As soon as two identical reconstructions are found, the corresponding decoded value is accepted as the correct result, and the decoding process terminates. Therefore, under the assumptions that: (i) the decoding function Decode (·) yields exact results for any k correct inputs; (ii) distinct verification sets containing at least one incorrect result produce distinct decoded outputs, DC ensures deterministic detection of correctness without false acceptance. Nevertheless, in approximate or noisy schemes—such as GPBACC, which introduce controlled perturbations to achieve privacy, equality in (15) may not hold even for honest nodes. This motivates the development of an Approximate Decode-and-Compare (ADC) variant (see Sect. V-B), which introduces tolerance intervals based on the decoding error envelope and confidence thresholds. 

2) Group Testing (GT): Since schemes like GPBACC achieve higher accuracy reconstruction as the number of correct intermediate results increases, it is advantageous to precisely identify and exclude malicious nodes rather than merely detecting inconsistencies. To this end, the Approximate Decode-and-Compare mechanism may be complemented with a Group Testing strategy, for efficient localization of adver-sarial workers whose outputs should be disregarded during decoding. A GT protocol is an efficient algorithm to identify defective items within a large population through a minimal number of collective tests. Instead of examining each item individually, GT performs tests over groups (pools) of items and infers the defective set based on the pattern of positive and negative outcomes. Let N = {1, 2, . . . , N } denote the set of all workers, among which an unknown subset A ⊆ N of size s ≪ N is adversarial (or faulty). A pooling matrix G ∈ { 0, 1}M ×N defines which workers participate in each of the M tests, where Gp,i = 1 

if worker i is included in pool p and 0 otherwise. For each pool p, a collective test is performed, and its binary outcome 

yp ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether at least one adversarial element was present in the pool: 

yp =

(1, if ∃i ∈ A with Gp,i = 1 ,

0, otherwise. (16) The goal is to reconstruct the unknown set A from the observation vector y = ( y1, . . . , y M ).Classical GT designs rely on combinatorial properties such as d-disjunct matrices, which guarantee that up to s adversarial workers can be uniquely identified if M = O(s log N ) tests are performed. Alternatively, random Bernoulli designs with 

Gp,i ∼ Ber( θ) achieve comparable performance with high probability, offering scalability and simplicity in implemen-tation. Decoding is then performed using logical rules like Combinatorial Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (COMP), proba-bilistic inference (Definite Defectives, DD), or optimization-based formulations (e.g., sparse recovery). In the context of distributed computing, each pool cor-responds to a subset of intermediate results combined and decoded together using the reconstruction function rS (·). If the reconstruction is inconsistent with expected behavior, the corresponding pool is labeled as failed. By analyzing the pattern of failing and passing pools through GT decoding, the master node can efficiently localize the malicious workers. Error-resilient GT formulations are particularly important in approximate-coded schemes (such as GPBACC), where nu-merical noise may induce false alarms or missed detections. Hence, integrating GT with Decode-and-Compare verification provides a scalable and fault-tolerant mechanism to detect and isolate adversarial nodes. 6

IV. T HREAT MODEL 

The distributed GPBACC scheme may be deployed under a Federated Learning system, where workers possess private data and exchange model updates with the master node, and in Decentralized Learning systems, where each node processes shared data owned by a master. For both cases, we pose a threat model wherein adversaries may attempt to compromise the privacy or the integrity of the computation. We distinguish two classes of adversaries according to their objectives and accessible information:  

> •

Semi-honest (honest-but-curious) adversaries, who cor-rectly follow the GPBACC protocol but attempt to in-fer information about other nodes’ or master’s private data. Semi-honest participants may collude, sharing their encoded inputs or outputs. The privacy requirement of GPBACC is to ensure that the information leakage per data point, iL, remains bounded by a target threshold ϵ

for any subset C ⊆ N of |C| = c colluding nodes.  

> •

Malicious (Byzantine) adversaries, those who actively deviate from the protocol by manipulating their compu-tations, sending incorrect, noisy, or adversarially crafted intermediate results. Such nodes may attempt to degrade the accuracy of the global model or output (poisoning attacks). They could also target the decoding to fail by returning inconsistent or divergent values, or remain stealthy by mimicking honest outputs within a small perturbation margin. The two types of adversaries pursue privacy or integrity at-tacks, respectively. Semi-honest adversaries aim to reconstruct or infer private information about the encoded data X, local updates, or sensitive model parameters. In Federated Learning, this corresponds to classic Membership Inference Attacks (MIA) or Gradient Leakage Attacks, where adversaries use the received model updates to infer whether a specific data point was part of the training set. GPBACC’s privacy objective is to prevent the success of such inference through noise-induced encoding. Malicious adversaries seek to compromise the correctness of the aggregated result, e.g., by injecting corrupted gradients or flipped labels in FL, or by sending arbitrary outputs in DL. The adversaries are assumed to have the following knowledge and operational limitations:  

> •

Semi-honest adversaries may share their local encoded data or intermediate results, but cannot access the raw data or randomness of other nodes.  

> •

Malicious adversaries may craft arbitrary outputs, but cannot compromise the master node or the secure com-munication channels. Furthermore, the encoding and decoding algorithms, interpo-lation points, and the public parameters of the scheme are publicly know, but the random coefficients Ri used in the encoding and the private inputs of other participants are not observable by other nodes. The design goal of GPBACC is to guarantee that iL ≤ ϵ in presence of up to c colluding semi-honest workers, and that up to b malicious adversaries are resisted exactly as if they were stragglers, so adversarial nodes have the less possible impact on the precision of the reconstruction. V. P RIVACY PRESERVATION AND BYZANTINE RESILIENCE IN GPBACC GPBACC supports adversary-resilience under federated and distributed learning alike. Though the same privacy-preserving coded computing are leveraged as common technical basis, the mechanisms required to guarantee integrity differ substantially. This Section describes our proposed solution for practical privacy and robust, verifiable computation with GPBACC. 

A. Private aggregation in Federated Learning 

In FL, our encoded scheme integrates naturally with robust aggregation strategies, just by embedding the aggregation rule (e.g., median, trimmed mean, Krum, Multi-Krum) directly as the target function f evaluated by the workers. We show below that setting the coding compression dimension to K = 1

enables a clean per-coordinate decoding structure while still allowing the master to reconstruct the aggregated update with high numerical precision. Under this condition, robust aggre-gation mitigates possible poisoning attacks, while GPBACC simultaneously provides input privacy and coded redundancy. The end-to-end workflow for this setting is illustrated in Fig. 2 for a simple setup with three clients (two honest, one adversarial) and a central aggregator. The computational procedure for private aggregation com-prises the following steps. Assume that all data owners have received an initial global model from the aggrega-tor, and have performed the local training using their lo-cal data. At this point, each data owner i encodes its model weights θ(i), after receiving a set of N shares 

uθ(i) = [ uθ(i) (β0), . . . , u θ(i) (βN −1)] . Without loss of gener-ality, let data owner 0 be an adversary, its model weights 

θ′(0) deliberately altered by some poisoning strategy and its corresponding encoded shares computed as uθ′(0) =[uθ′(0) (β0), . . . , u θ′(0) (βN −1)] . In order to keep the coded elements decodable and to preserve a simple per-coordinate decoding interpretation, the coding compression dimension is set to K = 1 . Hence, each owner’s encoded rational function compresses the first dimension to a single interpolation ele-ment (no multi-slicing along the first index). This is done as follows: (i) The encoded share uθ(i) (βj ) represents a single coded object whose entries correspond to coordinates of θ(i).The Berrut decoder is then applied coordinate-wise (or on flattened tensors). (ii) With K = 1 , any decoding set S of size k corresponds to exactly thhe minimal number of points required to recover the coded element, which avoids inter-block interference. This choice keeps the structure of GPBACC compatible with standard aggregation hence it allows workers to compute robust aggregators on the received encoded vectors coordinate-wise (or via per-coordinate operations) and permits the master (aggregator) to apply Berrut decoding coordinate-wise to ob-tain the aggregated coordinates. In the communication phase, each data owner i exchanges 

uθ(i) (βj ) with every other data owner j̸ = i. Then, the com-putation phase starts whereby each data owner j uses its cor-responding shares [uθ(0) (βj ), . . . , u θ′(N −1) (βj )] for computing 7Semi-honest node 

> GPBACC
> Semi-honest node
> GPBACC
> Malicious node
> GPBACC
> FL Aggregator
> Broadcast channel
> GPBACC decoder

Fig. 2: GPBACC over Federated Learning the target function value vj = f (uθ(0) (βj ), . . . , u θ′(N −1) (βj )) ,which in this case will be some robust aggregation strategy. We consider two representative families of aggregations com-patible with GPBACC. 1) Coordinate-wise robust rules (Median, Trimmed-Mean) .These aggregators operate independently per coordinate: 

Agg coord ({θ(i)}N −1 

> i=0

)r = stat  {θ(i) 

> r

}N −1

> i=0

, r = 1 , . . . , d, 

where stat( ·) is a simple estimator, like median, trimmed mean, etc. 2) Selection-based rules (Krum, Multi-Krum) . Krum ’s ro-bust aggregation algorithm selects one client update that is most representative (minimizes summed distances to nearest neighbors); instead, multi-Krum averages several such selections. Formally, Krum’s algorithm returns 

Krum( {θ(i)}) = θ(j∗), j ∗ = arg min  

> jN−b−2

X

> m=1

∥θ(j)−θ(m)∥2,

with appropriate neighbor selection. Once the computation in the encoded domain is finished, each data owner will send its locally computed result vj to the Aggregator. Lastly, the aggregator approximately reconstructs the value of f (θ(0) , . . . , θ (N −1) ) with the decoding function. 

Remarks : Robust aggregators increase per-worker compute costs, since each worker must evaluate the aggregator on the set of encoded inputs it receives. Also, it is worth noting that some robust selection rules (e.g., Krum) are sensitive to the decoding noise, because selection depends on pairwise distances between the received results, unlike coordinate-wise aggregators (i.e., median, trimmed mean), that tolerate larger coordinate-wise decoding variance. Increasing the noise parameter σn (for privacy) or increasing redundancy T reduces decoding precision and can affect Krum’s aggregation more severely than coordinate-wise methods. 

B. Adversary-resistance with Approximate Decode-and-Compare & Group Testing 

In DL, there is a single data owner that shares data, so no aggregator entity is involved. Instead, correctness must be achieved through verification mechanisms applied directly to coded intermediate results exchanged from the workers. For this setting, we introduce a dedicated verification pipeline based on ADC combined with GT. ADC provides a prin-cipled consistency test adapted to GPBACC’s approximate reconstruction error, while GT efficiently localizes adversarial workers by pooling subsets of worker outputs. Together, ADC and GT enable a prune-and-refine decoding procedure that removes corrupted contributions and reconstructs the output using only verified inputs. The full DL workflow is depicted in Fig. 3 for a configuration with three workers and one data owner (master). The proposed scheme operates according to this workflow. For the encoding phase, consider a initial situation where the master data owner wants to exchange their data to a set of workers to offload the training of a ML model. At this point, the data owner encodes the dataset X, generating a set of N shares uX = [ uX (β0), . . . , u X (βN −1)] , for all 

i ∈ [N ]. Differently from a centralized aggregation, K can now be tuned for balancing the communication cost versus the numerical precision of the approximate computations. Next, the data owner transmits each share uX (βi) to worker 

i, who uses its corresponding share uX (βi) for computing the target function vi = f (uX (βi)) = vi, which in our framework will be some updating rule for a local model (e.g., regressions, CNNs, VAEs, etc; the specific choice of the local model is independent on the encoded computations). Assuming worker 0 is malicious, its corrupted result will be denoted as v′

> 0

. Following the scheme, each worker i will exchange its local computed result vi with the master data 8GPBACC        

> Honest-but-curious worker
> Honest-but-curious worker
> Adversary worker Data owner Data owner GPBACC
> 1. Encoding phase 2. Communication 3. Computation phase 4. Sharing of results 5. Adversary mitigation 6. Decoding & reconstruction
> Data owner

Fig. 3: GPBACC over Distributed Learning owner, and it will be the master’s task to detect and filter out the Byzantine participants’ results with the proposed GT+ADC prune-and-refine strategy for obtaining an approximate result 

f (X) contributed only by honest participants. More specifically, the proposed ADC+GT computing pipeline detects inconsistent worker outputs in approximate-coded scenarios, localizes malicious workers using pooling, and prunes them to re-decode with a cleaner set. The design leverages the decoding error envelope of Berrut interpolation to derive principled thresholds. To this end, let rS (·) denote the generic reconstruction operator obtained from any veri-fication subset S in our approximate Decode-and-Compare. For a reconstruction bfS := rS (α) evaluated at a decoder point α, denote by E(z, s, N, f ) the worst-case decoding error envelope when decoding in the presence of s stragglers (equivalently, using a subset of size |S| = N − s), inter-polation geometry parameterized by z, and target function 

f . Formally, assume that ∥bfS − f ⋆∥ ≤ E(z, s, N, f ), where 

f ⋆ is the ideal (noiseless) aggregate. Given two verification subsets A and B of identical size, by the triangle inequality 

∥bfA − bfB ∥ ≤ ∥ bfA − f ⋆∥ + ∥f ⋆ − bfB ∥ ≤ 2E(z, s, N, f ), we could adopt the detection threshold 

τg = 2 E(z, s, N, f ) (17) and declare two reconstructions approximately equal when their distance is ≤ τg . Clearly, the bound τg is a worst-case scenario for the decoding error, therefore it will be very loose in many real scenarios, thus misleading the strategy toward false negatives. For this reason, in this work we use a bootstrap strategy to improve the tightness of the ADC acceptance rule: 1) The master randomly subtracts a subset ˆuX of length d

from the N shares of the encoded dataset uX , iterating over the encoded dimension. This means that, if the original dataset is a tensor of size k0 × k1 × · · · × kL−1,each encoded share will have a compressed size of 

K × k1 × · · · × kL−1, and the reduced subset will have shares of size d × k1 × · · · × kL−1. Note that d ≤ K,and as d increases, the threshold calculated will be more accurate in exchange for bootstrap time. 2) The master computes d model executions (using the initial model weights) over the N subtracted shares, and for each execution, divides the results in p groups of length d.3) For each model execution, the master decodes each of the groups, obtaining the group of results V =[V0, V1, . . . , Vp−1].4) For each model execution, the master decodes the groups of results V = [ V0, V1, . . . , Vp−1]. For each group Vi,the master computes Mi = max( Vi), mi = min( Vi),

and the group diameter Di = Mi − mi. The overall maximum discrepancy across all groups is then D =max 0≤i≤d Di. Finally, the master fixes τ = aD , where 

a ∈ R, a ≥ 1, is a tunable parameter for avoiding worst-case scenarios where the results are actually correct. On top of the ADC mechanism, our scheme additionally integrates a group testing technique to detect Byzantine nodes, and uses a non-adaptive pooling matrix G ∈ { 0, 1}M ×N .Then, for each pool p with worker set Sp = {i : Gp,i = 1 },the pooled reconstruction bfSp is computed and the pool p

passes the test if bfSp − m∥ ≤ τ . Therefore, Pfail = {p :

∥bfSp − m∥ > τ } are the failed pools, and encoding the binary pattern y := I(p̸ ∈ P fail ) of pool outcomes, we just decode a suspect set bA with any suitable group-testing decoder such as COMP, DD, or score-thresholding. Because of the approximation noise, it is necessary to use noisy-GT decoding that tolerates false positives and false negatives. The flagged workers bA identified during the group-testing tomography are subsequently pruned and their evaluation results of the target function are dismissed. Finally, the desired values are reconstructed (approximately) only with the cleaned set Fclean , bffinal = rBerrut ,Fclean (α).Because decoding error in GPBACC decreases with the frac-tion of honest points, this prune-and-refine approach improves final precision. The last step in the mechanism for resilience against Byzan-tine attackers is the calibration of the noisy group testing de-tection algorithm. To that end, let s be the maximum expected number of adversarial workers. Choose M = Θ( s log N ) and a pooling density θ so that pools have expected size θN ∈

[0 .05 N, 0.2N ]. Under noisy observations with false-positive rate α and false-negative rate β, the GT decoder parameters (e.g., threshold γ in score decoding) must be tuned to control the trade-off between the false removal of honest workers (reduces decoding fidelity); and the missed adversaries (leads to residual poisoning influence). This calibration is part of our empirical methodology and will be explained in Section VI. 9

Algorithm 1 GT + ADC prune-and-refine 

Require: Bootstrap for calculating threshold τ

Require: Received intermediate results I = {Ii}i∈F , pooling matrix G 

> 1:

for each pool p = 1 , . . . , M do  

> 2:

compute bfSp and set yp ← 1[∥bfSp − m∥ > τ ] 

> 3:

end for  

> 4:

Decode suspect set: bA ← NoisyGTDecoder (y) 

> 5:

Fclean ← F \ bA 

> 6:

Output final reconstruction bffinal = rBerrut ,Fclean (α)

VI. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

This Section evaluates the proposed Generalized Privacy-aware Berrut Approximated Coded Computing scheme under both a centralized federated learning setting and a decentral-ized learning architecture, compared to the following state-of-the-art models. For FL, GPBACC is compared to the plain unprotected version of the learning algorithm, and to two other techniques that rely on alternative types of PETs: an efficient Multi-Key Homomorphic Encryption scheme [42], and the Sparse Vector Technique [43] with Differential Privacy (DP-SVT). Each of these PETs was further tested with robust aggregation strategies, provided these are supported by the baselines: average, median, Krum and multi-Krum. The experiments have been conducted under diverse threat conditions: without attacks, with a label flipping attack, with a Gaussian noise attack, and under a robust membership inference attack. The case DL differs in the type of information to protect and the types of function computed, which rendered the MKHE and SVT not applicable. For this reason, we compare the GPBACC framework with two alternative methods: unpro-tected DL, and Analog Lagrange Coded Computing, a privacy-preserving coded computing baseline that uses analog polyno-mial encoding. Since an aggregation strategy resistant against poisoning attacks does not exist in DL, GPBACC is comple-mented with ADC + GT with refine-and-prune strategy as its adversary resistance countermeasure. Moreover, with ALCC, a typical DC method was used in combination with a very small allowed deviance, given that the reconstruction results of this algorithm are almost exact. All the experiments have been repeated for different types of attacks: no attacks, label flipping, and noise addition. The robust membership inference attack is not reproducible under DL, so the achievable privacy has been measured through a membership inference estimation of the mutual information over the encoded datasets. The learning models used in the experiments are convolu-tional neural networks over the same datasets (MNIST ans CIFAR10) and with the same CNN architecture, ensuring a fair comparison with the baseline algorithms. 

A. Results for Federated Learning 

We evaluate five FL configurations: unprotected FL, prac-tical MKHE, SVT with DP, and GPBACC (ours) with CNN+MNIST data, plus FL with a CNN+CIFAR10 under a robust membership inference attack. Unless noted, we TABLE I: Clean training on CNN–MNIST: accuracy evolution across rounds. R X means average accuracy at round X.                                                                       

> Aggr. R2 R4 R6 R8 R10
> FED -
> AVG 0.9559 0.9755 0.9813 0.9839 0.9855
> MEDIAN 0.9575 0.9759 0.9812 0.9838 0.9854
> KRUM 0.9397 0.9659 0.9727 0.9755 0.9767
> MKRUM 0.9530 0.9735 0.9799 0.9832 0.9845
> MKHE AVG 0.9558 0.9757 0.9807 0.9838 0.9850
> DP -SVT AVG 0.1876 0.5691 0.6098 0.5827 0.5005
> MEDIAN 0.1287 0.1037 0.1046 0.1021 0.0993
> KRUM 0.2658 0.3358 0.3054 0.2439 0.2265
> MKRUM 0.3013 0.5052 0.4515 0.4360 0.3571
> GPBACC
> AVG 0.9563 0.9755 0.9810 0.9837 0.9853
> MEDIAN 0.9565 0.9753 0.9808 0.9835 0.9851
> KRUM 0.8831 0.9347 0.9172 0.9443 0.9497
> MKRUM 0.9498 0.9702 0.9763 0.9806 0.9830

TABLE II: RMIA AUC at round 30 (lower is better. 

Model Uncoded GPBACC MKHE SVT 

> CNN

-MNIST 0.5230 0.5077 0.5028 0.5024 

> CNN

-CIFAR 10 0.6202 0.5018 0.5022 0.5012 

report numerical values for the accuracy only, since pre-cision/recall/F1 follow a similar trend to accuracy. Privacy leakage is measured with RMIA AUC (lower is better; random 

≈ 0.50 ). Resilience against poisoning attacks is evaluated by running both label flipping and noise addition under standard aggregation algorithms in the literature. Table I reports accuracy evolution across training rounds under clean (non-adversarial) conditions, raising several ob-servations. First, the Unarmored baseline reaches strong per-formance for all aggregation rules. Simple averaging yields the highest accuracy at R10, while robust aggregators such as Median and Multi-Krum closely match this value. Krum aggregation converges more slowly and attains a slightly lower final accuracy due to its conservative robust selection mech-anism. Compared to these, GPBACC preserves clean-model utility almost perfectly. For Average, Median and Multi-Krum, the accuracy curve remains nearly indistinguishable from the unarmored case, with deviations below 4 × 10 −4 at round 

10 . This confirms that GPBACC’s encoding, decoding, and interpolation introduce negligible distortion during training. The only exception is Krum’s aggregation, where GPBACC exhibits a slower improvement over time and attains lower final accuracy. Nevertheless, this is expected because Krum’s algorithm relies on selecting just one valid model update based on pairwise distances, which will be more sensitive to the small reconstruction errors inherent to approximate decoding. The results also show that the encryption-based MKHE, with zero privacy leakage but a high computational cost, achieves essentially identical performance to both GPBACC and the un-armored baseline. Finally, the use of DP as privacy mechanism, in SVT, severely harms clean accuracy across all aggregators. Table II lists the AUC scores of the RMIA attacks, showing that protected scenarios mitigate the effects of the attack, which are visible under the unarmored setting. Here, CNN-10 

TABLE III: Label Flipping on CNN–MNIST: accuracy evolution (R2, R4, R6, R8, R10).                                                                        

> Aggr. R2 R4 R6 R8 R10
> FED -
> AVG 0.9531 0.9727 0.9788 0.9814 0.9829
> MEDIAN 0.9557 0.9751 0.9813 0.9837 0.9852
> KRUM 0.9416 0.9656 0.9728 0.9759 0.9764
> MKRUM 0.9532 0.9738 0.9804 0.9829 0.9845
> MKHE AVG 0.9526 0.9696 0.9772 0.9813 0.9830
> DP -SVT AVG 0.1493 0.5311 0.5901 0.5053 0.4618
> MEDIAN 0.1195 0.0990 0.1021 0.1129 0.1016
> KRUM 0.2198 0.2797 0.2753 0.2486 0.2333
> MKRUM 0.2203 0.4620 0.4822 0.4111 0.3556
> GPBACC
> AVG 0.9521 0.9719 0.9785 0.9814 0.9831
> MEDIAN 0.9532 0.9722 0.9785 0.9813 0.9831
> KRUM 0.8715 0.9155 0.9250 0.9135 0.9720
> MKRUM 0.9372 0.9641 0.9701 0.9721 0.9720

CIFAR10 was also tested, given its tendency to overfitting, the key factor that is susceptible to MIA attacks in general. For adapting the RMIA attack to a FL setting, the Byzantine aggregator chooses one data owner as victim and always sends back their received local updates to it without doing any aggregation, whereas it aggregates properly for the non-attacked nodes. This forces the training of an overfitted model having a better resilience to the attack for that single victim. Note that induction of overfitting is only realizable for the unarmored and SVT settings, since GPBACC and MKHE secure the aggregation process, avoiding the ability of driving a victim to overfit. This implies that the attack is evaluated over the global reconstructed model in GPBACC, and from victim’s local encrypted model in MKHE. For the CNN–MNIST model, the unprotected system ex-hibits a mild but noticeable vulnerability, confirming that even simple models trained on low-dimensional data can leak membership information. All three defense mechanisms substantially reduce the attack’s effectiveness, pushing the AUC closer to random behavior (AUC ≈ 0.5) , with GPBACC slightly worse than MKHE and SVT, but all essentially elim-inating detectable membership signals during training. The same pattern repeats and is even more pronounced for the CNN–CIFAR10 model, where the unarmored configuration yields a significantly high AUC, whereas the three PET mech-anisms mitigate the attack. Importantly, the defenses not only reduce the absolute leakage but also normalize the privacy risk across architectures: the unprotected CIFAR10 model leaks far more than the MNIST one, yet all defended configurations converge to nearly identical AUC values. Table III examines accuracy under a label-flipping attack. In the unprotected setting (the reference baseline), the label flipping attack does not have a strong effect on the overall model convergence. It mainly affects the first round of the protocol, and it then slightly reduces the maximum accuracy achieved for the standard federated averaging mechanism. Krum’s aggregation consistently underperforms the others. For GPBACC, the results closely mirror this baseline under average and median aggregation, reinforcing that GPBACC’s privacy mechanism does not hinder model convergence while still providing privacy protection. The most interesting be-TABLE IV: Noise Addition on CNN–MNIST: accuracy evolution (R2, R4, R6, R8, R10).                                                                        

> Aggr. R2 R4 R6 R8 R10
> FED -
> AVG 0.3873 0.4775 0.5238 0.5860 0.6338
> MEDIAN 0.9546 0.9744 0.9806 0.9831 0.9847
> KRUM 0.9418 0.9662 0.9712 0.9720 0.9743
> MKRUM 0.9537 0.9736 0.9792 0.9819 0.9837
> MKHE AVG 0.2659 0.4000 0.4944 0.5637 0.6197
> DP -SVT AVG 0.1876 0.5691 0.6098 0.5827 0.5005
> MEDIAN 0.1287 0.1037 0.1046 0.1021 0.0993
> KRUM 0.2658 0.3358 0.3054 0.2439 0.2265
> MKRUM 0.3013 0.5052 0.4515 0.4360 0.3571
> GPBACC
> AVG 0.3749 0.4614 0.5374 0.5640 0.5901
> MEDIAN 0.9336 0.9598 0.9669 0.9737 0.9759
> KRUM 0.8848 0.9173 0.9548 0.9608 0.9587
> MKRUM 0.9533 0.9728 0.9787 0.9817 0.9834

havior arises from GPBACC + Krum, which displays a non-monotonic and noticeably lower accuracy profile. Accuracy drops sharply compared to all other configurations, though raises again at R10. This suggests an interaction effect: the additional variance and structure introduced by GPBACC encoding can skew Krum’s distance-based scoring, causing it to select suboptimal updates, especially in early rounds where gradient signal-to-noise ratios are already low. Nevertheless, the recovery by R10 indicates that the model still converges once gradients stabilize. MKHE matches the baseline almost exactly, indicating that homomorphic encryption does not distort gradient distributions enough to weaken robustness. DP-SVT fails to converge, providing no utility for learning. Table IV evaluates the impact of Gaussian noise injection on CNN–MNIST training. Unlike label flipping, where ma-licious gradients are structured, adversarial—noise addition primarily stresses the stability of aggregators and their ability to extract signal from highly perturbed updates. In the non-private unprotected, the contrast between aggregation rules is immediately evident. FedAvg fails, as injected noise directly corrupts the global update, but Median, Krum, and multi-Krum all attain strong resilience, confirming as in other works that robust aggregation is essential when gradient reliability is low. Under private aggregation, only our GPBACC is capable of keeping nearly the same performance as with non-private robust aggregation, while MKHE and differential privacy are completely ineffective. The noise addition experiment highlights three key insights. First, robust aggregators are indispensable when clients submit highly noisy updates, with median providing the greatest stability. Second, GPBACC and MKHE do not meaningfully degrade robustness; the determining factor remains the ag-gregation strategy supported rather than the PET mechanism. Third, DPSVT imposes the steepest utility cost, and its in-stability under noise suggests that combining heavy DP noise with adversarial or unreliable updates can lead to degradation. 

B. Results for Decentralized Learning 

In a decentralized learning network, three configurations are compared for a CNN+MNIST model: no privacy protection 11 

TABLE V: Clean decentralized learning over CNN–MNIST: accuracy evolution across training rounds.                    

> R1 R2 R3 R4 R5
> DFL 0.9643 0.9723 0.9675 0.9733 0.9808
> ALCC 0.9645 0.9684 0.9743 0.9707 0.9772
> GPBACC 0.9648 0.9765 0.9658 0.9801 0.9716

(baseline), ALCC, and GPBACC (ours). Again, we report just accuracy since precision/recall/F1 follow the same pattern of variation as the accuracy values. For the quantification of privacy, RMIA is no longer a valid strategy, since in DL local model updates are not exchanged, only model execution results. In this case, in practice, we measure the mutual information of the encoded datasets, and compare them with the theoretical bounds, validating their privacy guarantees provided. Similar observations hold with poisoning attacks, in that label flipping cannot be applied anymore because workers do not have access to labels, so noise addition over the model execution results is the only possible threat to demonstrate practical privacy. GPBACC uses ADC+GT technique for resisting adversary behaviour while we implemented vanilla Decode and Compare for ALCC (with a very small error bound), since ALCC pro-vides almost perfect results. Additionally, since ALCC cannot directly compute a CNN, we used polynomial approximations for the activation functions of the model architecture. Please note that this has an impact on precision that highly variates depending on the model trained, even making some models unfeasible to use. Additionally, this also adds an additional overhead in the researching task, since the most popular ML frameworks do not support these approximations natively, and they must be explictly created. Finally, there is also an exchange between grade of the approximated model and the amount of adversary nodes you can resist using ALCC, since more grade requires more correct results to reconstruct. Table V reports the accuracy evolution across training rounds for clean decentralized learning on CNN–MNIST. In the absence of adversarial behavior, all methods achieve comparable performance, indicating that neither coding nor verification mechanisms inherently degrade learning under benign conditions. The Unarmored baseline shows stable convergence, reach-ing an accuracy of 0.9808 at R5. ALCC closely tracks this trajectory, with marginal round-to-round fluctuations. This confirms that exact coded computing does not introduce no-ticeable optimization bias in decentralized settings. GPBACC exhibits similar average performance but with increased variance across rounds, while it attains a similar highest accuracy at R4 ( 0.9801 ). This behavior is consis-tent with GPBACC’s approximate reconstruction error, which introduces small numerical perturbations that barely affects convergence in fully decentralized optimization. Table VI reports the accuracy evolution under a noise addition attack in decentralized learning. In this setting, a subset of workers injects additive noise into their local updates, directly corrupting intermediate results exchanged with the TABLE VI: Decentralized learning under noise addition attack: accuracy evolution across training rounds.                    

> R1 R2 R3 R4 R5
> DFL 0.6151 0.6237 0.6320 0.6338 0.6326
> ALCC 0.9610 0.9653 0.9767 0.9764 0.9741
> GPBACC 0.9692 0.9683 0.9719 0.9636 0.9779

master. The Unarmored baseline is highly vulnerable to this attack. Accuracy collapses to approximately 0.63 from the first round and remains stagnant across subsequent rounds, indicating that even moderate noise severely disrupts convergence when no protection mechanism is in place. In contrast, both GPBACC and ALCC maintain high accuracy throughout training. ALCC achieves stable performance, converging around 0.97 ∼ 0.98 

by R5, confirming the effectiveness of exact coded redundancy in filtering noisy contributions. GPBACC performs compara-bly, with accuracy consistently above 0.96 . Minor round-to-round fluctuations are expected due to GPBACC’s approximate reconstruction, but these do not hinder overall convergence. Overall, these results demonstrate that coded computing mechanisms are essential for decentralized learning robust-ness. GPBACC achieves noise resilience comparable to ex-act ALCC while being more flexible in distributed learning strategies and model architectures, highlighting its suitability for adversarial decentralized settings where both robustness and privacy are required. 

C. Privacy and Data Obfuscation 

In decentralized learning configuration, the master is the owner of the data, which is exchanged encoded to the work-ers. This makes RMIA unusable for validating the practical privacy of this encoded dataset. Therefore, we will leverage a numerical estimator of the mutual information between the plain dataset ( X) and the encoded one ( Y ), and compare this result with the theoretical privacy leakage metric (13). For this practical measure, we adopt the KSG estimator [44]. This estimator is based on the observation that mutual infor-mation can de defined as a difference of entropies, I(X; Y ) = 

H(X) + H(Y ) − H(X, Y ), and that each entropy term can be estimated from local neighborhood statistics obtained via k-nearest neighbors. Crucially, KSG enforces a shared local neighborhood scale across joint and marginal spaces, which significantly reduces bias compared to naive entropy-difference estimators. For each sample (xi, y i), distances in joint space are computed using the ℓ∞ norm: 

∥(xi, y i) − (xj , y j )∥∞ = max  ∥xi − xj ∥, ∥yi − yj ∥.

Let ϵi denote the distance from (xi, y i) to its k-th nearest neighbor in joint space under this metric, and 

nx(i) = # {j̸ = i : ∥xi − xj ∥ < ϵ i},ny (i) = # {j̸ = i : ∥yi − yj ∥ < ϵ i}.

The KSG estimator of mutual information is given by 

bIKSG = ψ(k)+ ψ(N )− 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

[ψ(nx(i) + 1) + ψ(ny (i) + 1)] ,12 

where ψ(·) denotes the digamma function. After applying this numerical estimator, we obtain a value of bIKSG = 1 .012 bits, which is very similar to the one obtained when applying the theoretic privacy metric ( iL ≤ 1 bit). This implies that the assumptions we have made to bound the theoretic privacy are reasonable, and the metric values are quite close to reality, at least for this type of datasets. VII. C ONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we introduce a unified framework for adversary-resistant distributed machine learning that jointly addresses privacy leakage and enhances resilience against ac-tive malicious adversaries in both federated and decentralized learning paradigms. In contrast to prior work in this field, which typically addresses privacy protection, robust aggre-gation, or verification mechanisms in isolation, our approach defines a solution that explicitly evaluates privacy leakage and malicious behavior under realistic attack scenarios. A key contribution of our research work is the explicit, attack-driven evaluation of both privacy and malicious resis-tance. Rather than assuming protection by construction, we implemented representative privacy attacks and adversarial behaviors, and evaluated their effectiveness against the pro-posed framework. The results show that the combination of approximate computations and a secret sharing scheme with robust aggregation and verification mechanisms significantly reduces privacy leakage while maintaining resilience against active adversaries. Consequently, our approach provides em-pirical evidence that GPBACC, when combined with appro-priate adversary-resistance mechanisms, can offer a practical and deployable alternative for real-world distributed learning systems. We are currently working on extending our proposal to more complex threat models and learning architectures, particularly those relevant to generative AI frameworks, given their pervasive relevance. REFERENCES [1] T. Nguyen and M. T. Thai, “Preserving privacy and security in federated learning,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 833–843, 2023. [2] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 115, pp. 619–640, 2021. [3] Q. Xie, S. Jiang, L. Jiang, Y. Huang, Z. Zhao, S. Khan, W. Dai, Z. Liu, and K. Wu, “Efficiency optimization techniques in privacy-preserving federated learning with homomorphic encryption: A brief survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 24 569–24 580, 2024. [4] A. T. Tran, T. D. Luong, and X. S. Pham, “A novel privacy-preserving federated learning model based on secure multi-party computation,” in International symposium on integrated uncertainty in knowledge modelling and decision making . Springer, 2023, pp. 321–333. [5] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggregation for federated learning,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing , vol. 70, pp. 1142–1154, 2022. [6] Z. Yang, A. Gang, and W. U. Bajwa, “Adversary-resilient distributed and decentralized statistical inference and machine learning: An overview of recent advances under the byzantine threat model,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 146–159, 2020. [7] C. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Bai, B. Yu, W. Li, and Y. Gao, “A survey on federated learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems , vol. 216, p. 106775, 2021. [8] E. T. M. Beltrán, M. Q. Pérez, P. M. S. Sánchez, S. L. Bernal, G. Bovet, M. G. Pérez, G. M. Pérez, and A. H. Celdrán, “Decentralized federated learning: Fundamentals, state of the art, frameworks, trends, and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2983–3013, 2023. [9] L. Yuan, Z. Wang, L. Sun, P. S. Yu, and C. G. Brinton, “Decentralized federated learning: A survey and perspective,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 11, no. 21, pp. 34 617–34 638, 2024. [10] X. Martínez-Luaña, M. Fernández-Veiga, R. P. Díaz-Redondo, and A. Fernández-Vilas, “Privacy-aware berrut approximated coded computing applied to general distributed learning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06759 [11] T. Jahani-Nezhad and M. A. Maddah-Ali, “Berrut approximated coded computing: Straggler resistance beyond polynomial computing,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 111–122, Jan. 2023. [12] K. Bonawitz, V. Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,ser. CCS ’17. ACM, Oct. 2017, pp. 1175–1191. [13] L. T. Phong, Y. Aono, T. Hayashi, L. Wang, and S. Moriai, “Privacy-preserving deep learning via additively homomorphic encryption,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1333–1345, May 2018. [14] R. Aziz, S. Banerjee, S. Bouzefrane, and T. Le Vinh, “Exploring homomorphic encryption and differential privacy techniques towards secure federated learning paradigm,” Future Internet , vol. 15, no. 9, p. 310, Sep. 2023. [15] J. Ma, S.-A. Naas, S. Sigg, and X. Lyu, “Privacy-preserving federated learning based on multi-key homomorphic encryption,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems , vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 5880–5901, 2022. [16] W. Mou, C. Fu, Y. Lei, and C. Hu, “A verifiable federated learning scheme based on secure multi-party computation,” in International conference on wireless algorithms, systems, and applications . Springer, 2021, pp. 198–209. [17] D. Byrd and A. Polychroniadou, “Differentially private secure multi-party computation for federated learning in financial applications,” in Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance , ser. ICAIF ’20. ACM, Oct. 2020, pp. 1–9. [18] V. Mugunthan, A. Polychroniadou, D. Byrd, and T. H. Balch, “Smpai: Secure multi-party computation for federated learning,” in Proceedings of the NeurIPS 2019 Workshop on Robust AI in Financial Services ,vol. 21. MIT Press Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019. [19] R. Kanagavelu, Z. Li, J. Samsudin, Y. Yang, F. Yang, R. S. Mong Goh, M. Cheah, P. Wiwatphonthana, K. Akkarajitsakul, and S. Wang, “Two-phase multi-party computation enabled privacy-preserving federated learning,” in 2020 20th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGRID) . IEEE, May 2020, pp. 410– 419. [20] K. Wei, J. Li, M. Ding, C. Ma, H. H. Yang, F. Farokhi, S. Jin, T. Q. Quek, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance analysis,” IEEE transactions on information forensics and security , vol. 15, pp. 3454–3469, 2020. [21] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, M. Yang, T. Wang, N. Wang, L. Lyu, D. Niyato, and K.-Y. Lam, “Local differential privacy-based federated learning for internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 8836–8853, 2020. [22] R. Hu, Y. Guo, H. Li, Q. Pei, and Y. Gong, “Personalized federated learning with differential privacy,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal ,vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9530–9539, Oct. 2020. [23] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ files/paper/2017/file/f4b9ec30ad9f68f89b29639786cb62ef-Paper.pdf [24] D. Yin et al. , “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in ICML , 2018. [25] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How to backdoor federated learning,” in Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, S. Chiappa and R. Calandra, Eds., vol. 108. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020, pp. 2938–2948. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/bagdasaryan20a.html 13 

[26] S. Li, E. C.-H. Ngai, and T. Voigt, “An experimental study of byzantine-robust aggregation schemes in federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 975–988, 2023. [27] L. Zhao, J. Jiang, B. Feng, Q. Wang, C. Shen, and Q. Li, “Sear: Secure and efficient aggregation for byzantine-robust federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3329–3342, 2021. [28] S. Li, E. Ngai, and T. Voigt, “Byzantine-robust aggregation in federated learning empowered industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1165–1175, 2021. [29] X. Lian, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, C.-J. Hsieh, W. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Can decentralized algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. NIPS’17. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, p. 5336–5346. [30] Z. Yang, A. Gang, and W. U. Bajwa, “Adversary-resilient inference and machine learning: From distributed to decentralized,” stat , vol. 1050, p. 23, 2019. [31] Z. Xing, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Li, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, L. Zhu et al. , “Zero-knowledge proof-based verifiable decen-tralized machine learning in communication network: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 2025. [32] D.-Z. Du and F. Hwang, “Group testing in the presence of errors,” World Scientific , 2013. [33] K. Lee, M. Lam, R. Pedarsani, D. Papailiopoulos, and K. Ramchandran, “Speeding up distributed machine learning using codes,” IEEE Transac-tions on Information Theory , vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 1514–1529, Mar. 2018. [34] S. Li, M. A. Maddah-Ali, and A. S. Avestimehr, “Coded mapreduce,” in 2015 53rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton) . IEEE, Sep. 2015, pp. 964–971. [35] Y. Wu, C. Li, H. Hu, X. Song, S. Ma, and Y. Shi, “Coded comput-ing for multi-cluster distributed computations,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 1114–1127, Feb. 2025. [36] Q. Yu, S. Li, N. Raviv, S. M. M. Kalan, M. Soltanolkotabi, and S. A. Avestimehr, “Lagrange coded computing: Optimal design for resiliency, security, and privacy,” in Proc. of the 22nd Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , vol. 89. PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2019, pp. 1215– 1225. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/yu19b.html [37] M. Soleymani, H. Mahdavifar, and A. S. Avestimehr, “Analog lagrange coded computing,” IEEE J. on Selected Areas in Information Theory ,vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 283–295, 2021. [38] R. Tandon, Q. Lei, A. G. Dimakis, and N. Karampatziakis, “Gradient coding: Avoiding stragglers in distributed learning,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, D. Precup and Y. W. Teh, Eds., vol. 70. PMLR, Aug. 2017, pp. 3368–3376. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/tandon17a.html [39] J.-P. Berrut and L. N. Trefethen, “Barycentric lagrange interpolation,” 

SIAM Review , vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 501–517, Jan. 2004. [40] H. Qiu, K. Zhu, N. C. Luong, and D. Niyato, “Approximated coded computing: Towards fast, private and secure distributed machine learn-ing,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing , vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1030–1042, Jul. 2025. [41] L. Schumacher, K. Pedersen, and P. Mogensen, “From antenna spacings to theoretical capacities - guidelines for simulating mimo systems,” in The 13th IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications , vol. 2, 2002, pp. 587–592 vol.2. [42] A. Pedrouzo-Ulloa, A. Boudguiga, O. Chakraborty, R. Sirdey, O. Stan, and M. Zuber, “Practical multi-key homomorphic encryption for more flexible and efficient secure federated average aggregation,” 07 2023, pp. 612–617. [43] C. Dwork, M. Naor, O. Reingold, G. N. Rothblum, and S. Vadhan, “On the complexity of differentially private data release: efficient algorithms and hardness results,” in Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , ser. STOC ’09. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2009, p. 381–390. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1536414.1536467 [44] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual information,” Physical Review E , vol. 69, no. 6, p. 066138, Jun. 2004.