Title: When Agents Remember Too Much: Memory Poisoning Attacks on Large Language Model Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06595v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:03:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# When Agents Remember Too Much: Memory Poisoning Attacks on Large Language Model Agents 

George Torres ‡, Sharad Shrestha ∗, and Satyajayant Misra §‡∗§ Department of Computer Science, §Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico, USA Email: ‡gtorrez@nmsu.edu, ∗sharad@nmsu.edu, §misra@nmsu.edu 

Abstract —Personal AI agents powered by large language mod-els can reason and act using available tools to access emails, manage calendars, and push code to remote repositories, all with minimal oversight. When augmented with long-term memory, an agent can recall specific details relevant to the current task, reducing the need for large context windows. Currently, long-term memory agents tend to fall into two distinct domains: conversational and action-planning agents. Personal assistant agents sit at the convergence of these two domains and handle sensitive information while interacting with untrusted information sources, creating previously unac-counted security vulnerabilities. In this work, we introduce the novel attack vector, GhostWriter, which exploits current memory subsystems in tool-using personal agents to poison their memory store. GhostWriter operates in two phases: injection, where an adversary sends a hidden attack payload to the target agent; and activation, in which the poisoned memory is retrieved. We show that GhostWriter achieves near-universal injection rates of approximately 98% and a high average activation rate of approximately 60% against state-of-the-art agents. This attack is possible due to the lack of security-focused memory governance. In response, we propose Agentic Memory Sentry (AM-Sentry), which leverages two mitigation techniques: a memory-saving policy and a memory-retrieval screen. Our experiments show that AM-Sentry dramatically reduces GhostWriter’s success rate while preserving agent utility. 

## 1. Introduction 

Large language model (LLM) agents can reason and act with minimal human oversight, enabling automation of complex, multi-step tasks. These agents have access to tools that improve their efficiency and agency, allowing them to access emails, reply to calendar invites, and even push code to remote repositories [1], [2]. An agent’s reasoning, decision-making, and accuracy can be further improved through the integration of long-term memory [3], [4]. An agent with long-term memory can recall specific details relevant to its current task, reducing the need for large context windows that do not scale well. Figure 1 illustrates this with an example: across sessions or after long periods between related tasks, an agent with only its context window Stateless LLM Agents       

> No context retained
> between sessions.
> Add
> memory
> layer
> LLM with Persistent Memory
> (Knowledgeable Partner)
> Retrieve
> Store New
> Context-aware responses drawn from
> accumulated history.
> User Question:
> "What's my project
> deadline?"
> Response: "I don't have
> access to your project's
> live schedule, so I can't
> see the current deadline ."
> User Question:
> "What's my project
> deadline?"
> Response: "The current
> deadline is May 7,
> 2026."
> Memory Store
> Context
> Memory Accumulation Over Time
> Monday
> Email:
> Project Scope
> Tuesday
> Meeting:
> Budget Review
> Wednesday
> Chat:
> User Preferences
> Thursday
> Email:
> Deadline Update
> Memory Store
> Fact: Deadline is
> Friday
> Preference: Likes
> morning meetings
> History: Discussed
> budget on Tuesday
> 15
> Facts

Figure 1: Stateless LLM agents process each interaction in isolation. LLM agents with persistent memory allow for querying and retrieving saved information. struggles to accurately answer the user’s question and may even hallucinate. In contrast, the agent equipped with a long-term memory store can dynamically retrieve the necessary context and accurately answer the given question. The existing literature on agents with long-term memory has primarily been split into two distinct domains: conversa-tional agents (i.e., chatbots) [3], [5], whose primary role is to talk with a user, and action-planning agents [4], [6], which focus on improving tool use or other complex operations, such as robotic control or code execution. Practical use cases that combine aspects of both domains, such as personal assistant agents or automated coding agents [7], [8], are currently underrepresented, and these agents would clearly benefit from including both fact-based and action-planning memory for tool use. When long-term memory is used in such agents, new security risks arise in the context of untrusted sources of information, their storage, and how they may, in turn, affect the agent’s future behavior. These agents routinely interact with untrusted sources of information, such as emails and documents, creating a distinct attack surface for indirect memory poisoning. An adversary can send malicious or misleading content to an agent (e.g. email agent), which is then stored in the agent’s memory store for later use. Later, when the user submits arXiv:2607.06595v1 [cs.CR] 6 Jul 2026 a benign prompt, the malicious content is retrieved from the memory store and added to the agent’s context, which alters the agent’s behavior to align with the adversary’s goals. For example, consider a personal assistant agent that saved a malicious workflow instruction that later directs it to include an unauthorized recipient in emails containing confidential information about the user’s current project, thereby compromising the user’s nondisclosure agreements. Such attacks are enabled by the lack of security-focused memory governance. Currently, long-term memory agents tend to retain every interaction. Memory governance for agents has been proposed by A-MAC [9], though it primarily focuses on improving utility rather than detecting malicious or misleading content, leaving the underlying memory stores vulnerable to these attacks. Security-focused memory gov-ernance is needed to protect agents from the influence of malicious content while remaining productive. The poisoning of an agent’s memory store or knowledge base has been explored by works such as AgentPoison [10] and MINJA [11], which demonstrated that corrupted mem-ory can significantly degrade agent behavior and can be exploited to induce harmful actions. The adversaries in these works have direct access to the memory system or direct interaction with the target agents, allowing them to directly inject memories or prompt agents to store poisoned memories. A more realistic scenario assumes that an ad-versary would not have direct access to the agent or its memory store; instead, they must poison the agent’s memory through the inputs it receives, such as emails, documents, and calendar events. To address these gaps in the literature, we detail a novel attack vector GhostWriter , which exploits the lack of security-focused memory governance in tool-using personal assistant agents to poison the memory store. GhostWriter 

operates in two phases: injection, where an adversary sends a hidden attack payload to the target agent, followed by activation, in which the poisoned memory is retrieved and influences the agent’s behavior. We show that GhostWriter 

achieves average injection rates of roughly 98% and a high average activation rate of roughly 60% across all tested state-of-the-art agent architectures. We also compare 

GhostWriter to prompt injection [12], another type of attack against agents, and highlight the differences in attack signa-ture and activation, showing that GhostWriter has a greater impact on the evaluated agents. We also propose Agentic Memory Sentry ( AM-Sentry ), which combines two mitigation techniques: a memory-saving policy and a retrieval screen, designed to pre-vent these attacks while maintaining utility. AM-Sentry ’s memory-saving policy has three levels of strictness, each adding stronger constraints and vulnerability-detection ca-pabilities. The retrieval screen can be enabled or disabled. When enabled, it reviews each retrieved memory entry and filters out those that contain vulnerabilities or hidden directives that could alter the agent’s behavior. The three memory-saving policies, paired with the two retrieval screen settings, yields six configurations. We analyze the effective-ness of each configuration in preventing GhostWriter attacks and its effects on agent performance. We show that attack effectiveness can be dramatically reduced at minimal cost to agent utility. We also introduce a custom test suite that assesses an agent’s recall and task performance in a personal assistant use case, allowing us to assess the impact AM-Sentry has on each agent’s base utility. Our novel contributions include:  

> •

We detail GhostWriter , a novel attack vector that exploits the lack of security-focused memory gov-ernance in long-term memory tool-using agents to poison the memory store via untrusted tool inputs.  

> •

We propose AM-Sentry , a novel memory defense framework with six configurations of memory policy strictness and retrieval screening.  

> •

We evaluate GhostWriter against five state-of-the-art agents across four LLM models and assess the ef-fectiveness of AM-Sentry in reducing attack success and preserving agent utility. We plan to release our implementation and evaluation toolkit, which includes our attack setup and agent perfor-mance test suite, to spur others to test new attack vectors and mitigation techniques or to evaluate the utility of their agent implementation. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 provides a literature review on LLM agents and memory poisoning, while Section 3 defines our system and threat models. We present the GhostWriter attack vector in Section 4 and the AM-Sentry mitigation architecture in Section 5. Our experimental methodology and evaluations are then covered in Sections 6 and 7, respectively. Finally, Sections 8 and 9 detail limitations, future work, and our concluding remarks. 

## 2. Background and Related Work 

2.1. LLM Agents 

LLM agents are autonomous systems that leverage LLMs to perceive, reason, and take dynamic actions based on their current context [2]. Agents are increasingly de-ployed in real-world settings [13], with open-source frame-works such as AutoGPT [14] and BabyAGI [15] providing easy means of adoption. Multi-step reasoning agents, such as ReAct [16], interleave reasoning with actions, enabling them to generate thoughts that enrich their current context and improve later decisions. Equipping agents with external tools provides them with a structured means of interacting with external elements and improving their performance [1]. Tools are widely used and incorporated into production-level LLM interfaces such as ChatGPT and Claude [7], [17]. Combining tool use and multi-step reasoning has greatly increased agent utility across the board [2], [18]. 

2.2. Memory-based Agents 

Memory context is a prevailing issue in current agents and LLM interfaces; large context windows tend to slow down performance and increase computational costs [3]. To address this issue, systems that manage an agent’s current context via an additional database have been proposed. One such approach is the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system, which pulls in real-time context from a pre-seeded database [19] based on the given prompt. A variety of RAG systems have been proposed [20] in the literature, but they mostly rely on pre-existing information and are unable to learn from their experiences. RAG systems and other information stores benefit from agents saving their own examples, experiences, and acquired knowledge in them. The concept of long-term cross-session memory was introduced by works such as MemGPT [3] and Generative Agents [21], showing that improvements in agent response and recall greatly outweigh those of simple systems that rely on longer context windows, which are not scalable. Agents store knowledge/interactions in their memory stores, labeling them with descriptive tags that enable later retrieval based on semantically similar prompts. MemoryOS [5] introduced a memory system composed of three types of memory stores: short-, medium-, and long-term. A-MEM [22] introduces dynamic memory linking, which uses an LLM call to help manage the memory store and the relationship between memories. The works discussed thus far have focused on conver-sational agents that engaged in conversation with a single user; a separate line of work involves action-planning agents such as Reflexion [23], which uses repeated self-reflections on past attempts to improve its current action plan. These action plans represent the steps an agent takes to reach a goal, which could involve successfully using an exter-nal tool or the steps needed to move a robotic machine. Retrieval-augmented planning (RAP) [6] introduces a long-term memory store for these types of agents, allowing them to draw on previously successful attempts (trajectories) at the same or similar tasks to improve performance and reduce the number of attempts needed to succeed. ExpeL [4] pairs both successful and failed stored trajectories with reflections to further improve performance, allowing agents to extract insights from their past experiences. Current work on long-term memory agents can be sep-arated into two domains: conversational agents, which re-member facts about their users, and action-planning agents, which remember optimal means for performing various actions and tool calls. Both domains focus on improving how memories are stored, tagged, and retrieved within their own context, leaving their convergence underexplored. Re-alistic, practical deployment, such as an automated coding or a personal assistant agent, is missing from these works. These types of agents require aspects from both domains, as they must store information about their users or work environments and use tools to perform specific actions. 

2.3. Memory Poisoning Attacks and Defenses 

Personal assistant agents are responsible for handling sensitive information and operations; thus, it is critical that their behavior not be steered toward adversarial outcomes. Agents powered by LLMs have been shown to be easily manipulated when provided with false or misleading in-formation, as demonstrated by recent incidents involving Meta customer support chat agents [24]. AgentPoison [10] shows the potential damage when such false or misleading information is persisted into long-term memory, showing that an injected poisoned memory can hijack an agent’s actions and induce malicious behavior. Agents can also be tricked into executing and then saving a malicious ac-tion plan through careful prompt injection, as detailed by MINJA [11]. These attacks center on impractical adversarial models; either the adversary has direct access to the memory store or to the agent itself, which would require access to the user’s credentials to mount an attack. Another means of mounting a memory poisoning attack is to feed an agent corrupted inputs through its tool interface, which are saved as part of an agent’s regular operations. Some early work has considered this attack vector, such as Zombie Agents [25], which details how web search-capable agents exposed to malicious web pages can be manipulated into storing adversarial instructions that alter behavior upon retrieval. However, this work operates under assumptions that limit its applicability to realistic deployments; it re-quires an agent with RAG-based memory to repeatedly store the same attack payload hundreds of times to be effec-tive, something that would not work on memory systems with simple deduplication. This and similar works, such as MemoryGraft [26], focused their attack evaluations on their own agent implementations rather than demonstrating their applicability to the state-of-the-art. Defenses against these poisoning attacks are an emerg-ing area with limited dedicated work. The existing literature tends to focus on AgentPoison and MINJA-type attacks. A-MemGuard [27], for example, proposes a consensus-based retrieval mechanism to detect anomalous memories, an ap-proach that is inapplicable to fact-based memory systems where no comparable reasoning paths exist. A-MAC [9] introduces the concept of memory governance, but focuses solely on utility and does not address memory poisoning vulnerabilities. No existing work investigates indirect mem-ory poisoning through untrusted tool inputs against state-of-the-art agents, nor proposes defenses that address this attack path or evaluate the resulting security-utility tradeoff. In this paper, we attempt to plug this gap. 

## 3. Models and Assumptions 

In this section, we describe the models and assumptions underlying our work on personal AI agents. We first present the system model, then outline our security assumptions, and finally define the threat model. 

3.1. System Model 

We envision a practical deployment in an office envi-ronment where a personal AI agent assists with email and calendar management. The agent autonomously monitors the user’s inbox and activates when the user receives emails or Incoming  

> Emails
> Calendar
> Events
> User
> Instructions
> Email Assistant
> Read &
> Remember
> Retrieve
> & Act
> Persistent Memory
> Team:
> Charlie
> (design),
> Alice
> (backend)
> Standup:
> 10am, Design
> Lab
> Deadline:
> May 7
> (moved from
> Apr 30)
> Client demo:
> Apr 28 with
> Globex
> Policy: draft
> all emails
> before sending
> Yevgeny
> phone: 123-
> 456-7890
> Example Action 1
> Send the standup link to the new
> hire
> Here's the Zoom link: tempest-
> corp.zoom.example/standup-42.
> Standup is at 10am in the Lab.
> Example Action 2
> When is the client demo?
> April 28: rescheduled from April
> 25 due to Pepper's travel change.
> Example Action 3
> Draft the Friday status update
> To: Cirilla.
> CC: Dana Wong (new policy).
> Subject: Weekly Status...

Figure 2: AI email assistant with persistent memory. calendar invites. The user can also submit prompts directly to the agent to request email summaries, feedback on in-progress documents, reminders of upcoming meetings, or to send emails on their behalf. To support interactions with external services, the agent has access to tool APIs that enable email and calendar functionality. The agent is also equipped with a long-term memory store to improve recall and better support task continuity and context retention. We consider four entities in this deployment: the user, their agent, internal contacts, and external contacts. Agents remain dormant until an event triggers their response. Events include direct user input, incoming emails or calendar invites, and scheduled events. When triggered, an agent processes the interaction and writes it to memory as a summary, extracted facts, a useful trajectory, or verbatim text, depending on the agent’s design. During processing, agents tag each memory based on its content and link it to closely related memories. When the user later submits a task or question, the agent retrieves relevant information into its context and responds accordingly. Retrieval typically proceeds by matching the tags in the user’s query to those in the memories. Fig-ure 2 illustrates a use case for an AI email assistant: the agent retrieves the relevant meeting invite, recalls a deadline change, and drafts an email to the correct recipient. An agent without memory lacks this context and would fail to recall the deadline change or identify the correct recipient. 

3.2. Security Assumptions 

Our security analysis is predicated on a set of operational assumptions. First, we assume the agent’s core execution logic is benign; its hardcoded actions operate in good faith and are free of malicious code. Second, we assume the agent’s memory infrastructure maintains strict cryptographic or logical isolation, rendering it fully resilient to out-of-band tampering thus functioning as a black box to the adversary. Finally, we assume user accounts are secure, and external adversaries cannot bypass standard access controls to directly interface with the agent or its host environment. 

3.3. Threat Model 

We consider the user to be fully trusted, but it’s agent can be steered toward malicious actions if its context is com-promised by adversarial directives. We also consider internal and external adversaries. Internal adversaries are parties with an established working relationship with the user’s organization, including employees, contractors, vendors, and other business partners. External adversaries are third parties with no such relationship. Both classes share the same attack mechanism: they use disguised inbound messages, such as emails that appear benign at a glance but contain hidden instructions. They differ, however, in contextual knowledge. Internal adversaries possess knowledge of the user’s work environment, including organizational structure, colleague names, ongoing projects, and project-specific context, mak-ing their attacks more convincing. External adversaries are limited to publicly available information, such as profes-sional networking sites and company websites. Neither class can directly access the agent’s API, modify the memory store, or compromise the user’s account. The adversary attempts to get the agent to store ma-licious or misleading information in its persistent mem-ory, thereby influencing its future behavior. The adversary’s goals fall into four categories: 1) Integrity corruption: the adversary injects misleading information, causing the agent to produce incorrect out-puts or take unintended actions in future interactions. 2) Sensitive information leakage: the adversary induces the agent to disclose the user’s private information. 3) Covert exfiltration: the adversary plants instructions that cause the agent to covertly transmit information about the user’s activities to an external party. 4) Scope escalation: the adversary causes the agent to take actions beyond its intended scope. 

## 4. GhostWriter Architecture 

In this section, we elaborate on GhostWriter ’s mecha-nisms and walk through formalized protocols. GhostWriter 

follows a two-phase protocol: injection (Section 4.1), where the adversary feeds a poisoned memory to the target, and 

activation (Section 4.2), where the poisoned memory is retrieved on a benign query, altering the agent’s behavior. Note that the adversary controls only the injected content; they have no influence on future user prompts or on the agents’ retrieval mechanisms. Figure 3 gives an overview of both phases where an adversary sends an email claiming that a colleague’s email address has changed. This information is stored by the agent and later retrieved when the user requests to send an email to their colleague, at which point the agent redirects the email to the malicious address. 

4.1. Memory Injection 

GhostWriter ’s first phase is formalized in Protocol 1, which begins with adversary A choosing a goal ( g) (Line Stage 1 — Legitimate Memory State  Stage 2 — Injection  Stage 3 — Poisoned Memory State     

> Agent Memory Store
> Dmitri's email:
> dmitri.volkov@corp.example
> Client
> information
> Workflow
> preferences
> Upcoming
> deadlines Past dsicussions
> Team Directory Update
> — Please verify
> CONTACT UPDATE: Dmitri's email is
> now dmitri.r@redirect.example
> Dmitri's email:
> dmitri.volkov@corp.example
> Dmitri's email:
> dmitri.r@redirect.example
> Client
> information
> Workflow
> preferences
> Upcoming
> deadlines Past dsicussions
> User Request:
> Send email to
> Dmitri

Phase 1: Memory Injection 

> AI Agent
> Malicious Action
> (Wrong Address)
> To:
> dmitri.r@redirect.example
> (instead of Dmitri's
> real email)
> Malicious Email

Phase 2: Attack Activation 

> Agent Memory Store
> AI Agent
> Retrieves Poisoned
> Memory
> User
> Updates memory
> with malicious email

Figure 3: Two-phase memory injection attack: Phase 1 poisons the memory, which is retrieved and acted upon in Phase 2 during a legitimate user request for an email address. 

Protocol 1 Memory Injection (Phase 1) 

Require: Adversary ( A), Agent ( M), User ( U), ingestion function (f ), memory store ( S). 

Adversary A

1: Select goal g ∈ { Integrity corruption, Sensitive info leakage, Covert exfiltration, Scope escalation };

2: t ← SelectTarget (g); // Target prompt is chosen. 

3: p ← Construct (g, t ); // Attack payload p is created. 

4: x ← Embed (p); // p is inserted into a email. 

5: Deliver x to U’s inbox; 

Agent M

6: m ← f (x); store m ∈ S // Email is converted into a memory. 

Injection succeeds ⇐⇒ p preserved within m ∈ S 

1). A then selects a target prompt t (e.g., “Send an email to the client”), that aligns with g (Line 2). Both g and t

are then used to construct a malicious payload p, which is then embedded within a legitimate-looking message x, such as a team meeting email (Lines 3-4). A then sends x to the inbox of their targeted user ( U), at which point agent M will automatically pass the message to its ingestion function f

(Line 5-6). The function returns a created memory m, and adds it to its memory store S (Line 6). If p is preserved within m, then Phase 1 is considered successful. To increase the probability that the malicious memory is retrieved by the user’s agent, an adversary can optimize their payload to better match the targeted prompt. This optimization can take place in black-, gray-, or white-box settings. Similar to how attacks on machine learning models are studied. While we consider all of the settings to be relevant, as outlined by our security assumptions we consider only a black-box approach. 

Score (p, T, E ) = 1

|T |

X

> qi∈T

cos  E(p), E (qi) (1) Protocol 2 describes our approach, in which an adversary can use a public email corpus, such as the Enron Email Corpus [28], clustering it into k topics which are stored in 

Q, examples of these topics include client communications, 

Protocol 2 Black-Box Retrieval Optimization 

Require: Payload ( p), email corpus ( C), embedding model ( E), number of topics ( k), target prompt ( t), similarity threshold (τ ). 

Ensure: Optimized payload p∗

1: Q ← Cluster (C, k, E ); // Cluster C into k topics. 

2: T ← classify (t, Q, E ); // Find topic cluster for t.

3: s ← Score (p, T, E ); // Score p’s similarity to T ;

4: while s < τ do 

5: p′ ← Rewrite (p);

6: s′ ← Score (p′, T, E );

7: if s′ > s then 

8: p ← p′, s ← s′; // Update p when p′ scores better. 

9: end if 

10: end while 

11: return p∗ = p; // Return the final result. 

deadline extensions, workflow policies, etc (Line 1). The adversary can then identify the cluster ( T ) most closely aligned to their target prompt t, allowing them to score ( s)the similarity of their attack email to T (Lines 2-3). The score is calculated using Equation 1, which takes an attack payload p, a topic cluster T , and an embedding algorithm 

E as parameters. For E there are several options to choose from for the attacker [29], [30], which may or may not align with the user’s agent’s embedding model. The computed similarity score s is then compared to a target threshold τ . If the score is below τ , then p will be rewritten and saved as a temporary attack email p′, which will then be scored and saved as s′ (Lines 4-6). If the resulting score s′ is higher than the previous score s, then p

is overwritten with p′ (Lines 7-8). This process is repeated until the similarity score exceeds τ , and the final optimized attack email is returned (Line 11). This iterative process ensures that the attack is potent. 

4.2. Attack Activation 

Protocol 3 outlines GhostWriter ’s second phase. Once a poisoned memory m is added to the memory store S, it lies dormant until it is later retrieved. The user ( U) submits Protocol 3 Attack Activation (Phase 2) 

Require: Agent ( M), User ( U), memory store ( S), retrieval win-dow ( k), poisoned memory ( m). 

User U 

> 1:

Submits a benign prompt q to M.

Agent M 

> 2:

R ← Retrieve (q, k, S); // k entries are retrieved from S. 

> 3:

C ← { q} ∪ R ; // Retrieved memories R is added to context.  

> 4:

M generates response r based on context C; 

> 5:

if m ∈ R then  

> 6:

r deviates from U’s intent;  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

r proceeds normally; // U’s intent is preserved.  

> 9:

end if 

a prompt ( q) to its agent ( M), which then passes q to its memory retrieval function (Line 1). The function returns a set of memories, R, composed of the top k results that most closely align with q (Line 2). R is then added to the agent’s current context ( C), which is utilized to generate a response r (Lines 3-4). If m is present in R, the agent’s behavior will be steered toward the adversary’s goal (Lines 5-6). Otherwise, the agent proceeds normally (Lines 7-9). Once the user submits a prompt that closely mirrors the targeted prompt, such as ‘send an email’, ‘schedule a meeting’, etc., the agent will be highly likely to retrieve the poisoned memory from its memory store. The agent, believing the memory to be trusted, follows the malicious directive planted within, which may have it add a malicious address to an email or leak sensitive information. An agent’s memory architecture affects its susceptibility to retrieving poisoned memories, as it may apply summarization steps, delete older memories in favor of newer ones, or combine details from a new memory into an old one. The impact of these architectural differences is analyzed in Section 7. 

## 5. AM-Sentry Architecture 

Proposed memory systems for agents largely ignore the adversarial threat vector introduced by storing inputs in long-term memory. These ingestion channels also give an adversary a path to inject false or malicious information into the agent’s memory, which can then shape the summaries it produces, the recommendations it makes, and the actions it takes on the user’s behalf. Adversaries can learn a lot about a company, such as employee names, communication protocol, allowing them to craft an attack payload indis-tinguishable from legitimate sources, as seen in targeted business email compromise (BEC) attacks [31]. In this context, spam filtering is insufficient because a targeted adversary can craft semantically valid messages that evade aggregate classifiers, and a single injection can persist across sessions. Defending against this threat requires policy directives defining which inputs may modify the long-term state. A secure memory governance system must be designed to satisfy the following goals:  

> •

Preserve utility: maintain the assistant’s ability to reason over accumulated context.  

> •

Signature-independent defenses: defend against novel, previously unseen payloads.  

> •

Malicious memory characterization: define what makes a memory unsafe.  

> •

Source trust modeling: assess inputs by where they originate, not only what they contain.  

> •

Architecture-agnostic: operate across assistant im-plementations and model families without assump-tions about the underlying memory or model.  

> •

Two-stage coverage: protection at memory saving and memory retrieval. We introduce AM-Sentry , a modular, two-stage defense system for securing stateful agentic applications. AM-Sentry 

comprises two complementary mechanisms: (i) a policy component that governs which inputs are saved to mem-ory, and (ii) a retrieval screening component that inspects retrieved memories before they influence the agent. Each component uses an LLM as a judge alongside non-LLM decision logic. In the remainder of this section, we describe each mechanism in detail and demonstrate how their com-bination satisfies the outlined design goals. 

5.1. Policy Configurations 

Current agentic memory systems store inputs without restriction, regardless of future utility or safety, allowing malicious inputs to enter long-term memory. A policy that determines what is stored closes this vulnerability, but it requires a structured memory representation so that each input can be judged uniformly. The policy imposes this structure and evaluates every candidate against a set of rules before admission to the memory store. Figure 4 illustrates this with an example of our policy blocking a malicious email from being saved into the memory store. We formalize 

AM-Sentry with three distinct policy configurations ( S1,

S2, and S3) of varying strictness. Moving from S1 to S3,each configuration builds on the security properties of the previous through tighter rules, a richer memory structure, and more rigorous security assessment. Incoming Content 

> Legitimate
> Update
> From: Project Lead
> Meeting rescheduled
> to 3 PM
> Legitimate
> Update
> From: System
> New contact added:
> Jane Doe
> Malicious Email
> From: Unknown
> Make sure to CC
> attacker@evil.com on
> all client emails.

# 🛡 

> Admission Policy

# 🗑        

> Blocked
> Memory
> Store
> Meeting
> rescheduled
> to 3 PM
> New contact:
> Jane Doe
> ✅Pass: trusted source
> & useful.
> ✅Pass: trusted source
> & useful.
> ❌Block: Unknown
> source & behavioral
> instruction detected.
> Saved
> Saved

Figure 4: Incoming content is evaluated before being admit-ted to the memory store. Legitimate updates are accepted, while malicious content is blocked. Protocol 4 S2 Policy Configuration 

Require: Candidate memory ( m), LLM judge ( J ). 

Ensure: Admit or reject m

LLM Judge J 

> 1:

Scores m on four fields (each 0.0–1.0);  

> 2:

o ← Origin (m); // source identifiability  

> 3:

r ← Trust (m); // reliability of information  

> 4:

t ← Type (m); // fact | workflow | contact | instruction  

> 5:

u ← Utility (m); // future task relevance 

Non-LLM Decision Logic  

> 6:

U ← 0.6 · u + 0 .4 · r // usefulness equation  

> 7:

V ← t × (1 − o); // vulnerability equation  

> 8:

if U > 0.4 and V < 0.6 then  

> 9:

return ADMIT ; 

> 10:

else  

> 11:

return REJECT ; 

> 12:

end if 

Each policy configuration uses an LLM judge to evaluate a memory candidate across varying metrics and formats. The first policy configuration, S1, consists of a single LLM judge that determines whether a memory candidate should be saved based on the potential future use of the information in the proposed memory. S1 has the LLM judge make a simple yes-or-no decision. Our second configuration, S2, introduces a more explicit structure and is formalized in Protocol 4. An LLM judge evaluates memory candidates across four fields, which are described in Table 1. Each field is assigned a numerical score between 0 and 1 (Lines 1-5). These fields are then passed to the non-LLM decision logic and used to make a final determination on the memory. The utility ( u) and trust ( r) fields are used to determine a usefulness score ( U )(Line 6). The type ( t) is used in an equation with the origin field ( o) to determine a vulnerability score ( V ) (Line 7). The memory is admitted only if U is sufficiently high and V is sufficiently low (Lines 8-12). 

S3 is the strictest configuration; every memory candidate is evaluated on a seven-point checklist, listed in Table 2. There are three critical items ( vulnerability , sensitivity , and 

source trust ), with the vulnerability triggering a hard re-jection if its score falls below the failing threshold. S3

is formalized in Protocol 5, which begins with an LLM judge that evaluates each checklist item and assigns a score between 0 and 1 (Lines 1-2). The filled-in checklist is then passed to non-LLM decision logic, which first checks TABLE 1: S2 memory fields. An LLM judge evaluates all four fields and assigns score to each. 

Field Scoring Guidance 

Origin User statement (1.0), Internal email/calendar (0.8), Client email/calendar (0.5), Untrusted email/calendar (0.2), or Unknown type (0.0). Trust High (1.0), Medium (0.5), or Low (0). Type Instruction (1.0), Workflow (0.7), Preference (0.5), Con-tact information (0.1), or Fact (0.0). Utility Essential (1.0), Moderately useful (0.5), Not useful (0.0). 

Protocol 5 S3 Policy Configuration 

Require: Candidate memory ( m), source metadata ( SM ), LLM judges ( J1, J2). 

Ensure: Admit or reject m

First LLM Judge J1 

> 1:

Scores m on seven-point checklist (each 0.0–1.0);  

> 2:

s1 ← Vulnerable ; s2 ← Sensitivity ; s3 ← Source ;

s4 ← Contradict ; s5 ← Instruction ; s6 ← Verify ;

s7 ← Justify ;

Non-LLM Decision Logic  

> 3:

if s1 < 0.6 then  

> 4:

return REJECT ; // hard reject on vulnerability  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

C ← (s2 + s3) / 2; // Critical item equation  

> 7:

N ← (s4 + s5 + s6 + s7) / 4; // Non-critical item equation  

> 8:

F ← 0.6 · C + 0 .4 · N ; // Final score equation  

> 9:

if F < 0.4 then  

> 10:

return REJECT ; 

> 11:

end if Second LLM Judge J2 

> 12:

J2 receives SM and s1-s7. 

> 13:

return J2’s admit/reject decision. // Looks for contradictions 

whether the vulnerability score is too low and rejects it if so (Lines 3-5). Otherwise, the other two critical items and the non-critical items are combined to determine the final score ( F ) for admission (Lines 6-8). If F falls below the acceptance threshold, the memory is rejected. Otherwise, the scores and memory metadata are passed to a second LLM judge, which looks for signs that the first LLM judge was compromised through prompt injection (Lines 9-11). If the second judge reasonably suspects the first judge was compromised, then the memory is dropped (Lines 12-13). Our policy configurations satisfy our design goals. They 

preserve utility by filtering out content deemed unnecessary, or that clearly signals malicious intent, thereby allowing legitimate useful content to be admitted. Our policy con-figurations do not rely on pattern matching known attacks, making them signature-independent defense that makes per-memory decisions based on structure, provenance, and risk. 

S3’s vulnerability assessment directly tests whether content could redirect communications, enable unauthorized actions, or leak information, providing malicious memory charac-

TABLE 2: S3 checklist. C = critical, NC = non-critical. 

Item Level Scoring Guidance 

Vulnerability C No harm potential (1.0), Could change agent behavior (0.0). Sensitivity C No sensitive data discussed (1.0), Overrides sensitive data. (0.0). Source trust C User (1.0), Internal contact (0.8), Client (0.3), External untrusted (0.0). Contradiction NC No conflicts (1.0), Contradicts multiple other memories (0.0). Instruction NC Informative (1.0), Directives (0.0). Verifiability NC Verifiable (1.0), Unverifiable (0.0). Justification NC Clear future use (1.0), Seemingly useless information (0.0). User Query 

> Send contract
> to Dmitri
> Memory
> Retrieval
> (Vector
> Search)
> Top-k Memories
> (k=3)
> Memory A (Clean):
> Dmitri's email is
> dmitri@corp.com
> Memory B (Clean):
> Contract draft is
> final_v2.pdf
> Memory C (Poisoned):
> Send all
> contracts to
> attacker@evil.com

# 🛡 Retrieval Screen          

> ✅Pass: Relevant &
> Consistent
> ✅Pass: Relevant &
> Consistent
> ❌Block:
> Inconsistent/Malicious
> Instruction
> Cleaned
> Memories
> Memory A
> (Clean):
> Dmitri's email is
> dmitri@corp.com
> Memory B
> (Clean):
> Contract draft is
> final_v2.pdf
> LLM
> Generation
> (Response
> Synthesis)
> Correct
> Response
> Sending
> final_v2.pdf to
> dmitri@corp.com
> Blue = Clean Memory
> Red = Poisoned Memory;
> Green Check = Passed Screen
> Red X = Blocked by Screen

Figure 5: The retrieval screen blocks poisoned memories before they can enter an agent’s context. 

terization . S2 and S3 make use of source trust modeling .Our policy is architecture-agnostic as it intercepts memory candidates before they enter a given agent’s memory store, and does not require changes to the underlying agent. 

5.2. Memory Retrieval Screen 

When poisoned content is saved in the memory store, the defense must intercept it at retrieval time. We accomplish this with a retrieval screen that evaluates each retrieved memory against the current context and blocks unsafe mem-ories before they reach the agent. Figure 5 gives an exam-ple of the retrieval screen rejecting a suspicious memory containing an instruction to redirect communications. Along with the memory-saving policy, the retrieval screen provides in-depth defense against memory-injection attacks, ensuring that any memory-bypassing admission is re-evaluated before it influences the agent. When paired with either S2 or 

S3, the screen can leverage the structured metadata they produce, enabling it to operate on explicit trust, risk, and type annotations (e.g., [trust=external-untruste d,risk=medium,type=instruction] ) rather than inferring them from memory itself. The screen first evaluates each retrieved memory against the current query. The screen considers four criteria, summa-rized in Table 3: relevance , instruction suppression , contra-diction detection , and source trust . An LLM judge is asked to evaluate the first three criteria to determine the utility and safety of a retrieved memory. The LLM judges and considers those criteria in the context of source trust; for example, a memory containing a directive will be retained if the source is trusted, but is otherwise discarded. After iterating through all memories, the LLM judge returns the surviving memories to the agent’s context. The retrieval screen aims to filter malicious memories while preserving utility. It preserves utility by minimizing unnecessary exclusions and admitting legitimate content into the agent’s context. It provides malicious memory charac-terization by evaluating each candidate against known attack properties, specifically embedded instructions and unverifi-able external claims. It models source trust by conditioning TABLE 3: Retrieval screen exclusion criteria. The screen drops a candidate if any criterion fires. 

Criterion Exclusion rule 

Relevance Memory not directly relevant to the current query. Instruction suppression Memory contains directives or behavioral rules; memories are data, not commands. Trust filter Memory from an untrusted external source making unverifiable claims. Contradiction detection Contradicts existing trusted information. 

on memory origin during evaluation, exploiting S2 and S3

metadata annotations when available. Finally, it completes 

two-stage coverage , serving as the memory-retrieval coun-terpart to the memory-saving policy and intercepting attacks that survive admission. 

## 6. Experimental Methodology 

6.1. Agent Selection 

Given the absence of long-term memory agents that are purpose-built for a personal assistant use case, we selected five state-of-the-art agent architectures and adapted them to a common evaluation setting: A-Mem [22], Mem0 [32], ExpeL [4], Letta (formerly MemGPT) [3], [33], and Memo-ryOS [5]. These agents represent a variety of memory repre-sentation, organization, and retrieval techniques, allowing us to compare against a variety of design choices. The majority of selected agents use fact-based memory, as they seemingly suit the use case best. We also included ExpeL, an agent with trajectory-based memory that stores successful action plans rather than facts, introducing distinct vulnerability characteristics for us to assess. We built a wrapper for each agent that exposes a com-mon interface. We only made architectural adjustments to allow us to evaluate each agent uniformly while preserving the mechanisms central to each agent’s design. The wrapper includes a system prompt that informs the agent of their assignment and capabilities, a common tool interface ac-cessible to all agents, and standardization of input feeding and output gathering. Our simulated tool APIs allow agents to accept input from email or calendar events and sending email. The agents were instrumented to capture all their output and operations to support analysis and iterative refine-ment of the adaptations. AM-Sentry was also integrated into the wrapper, so that regardless of how an agent represents their memory, AM-Sentry could be applied to all. These agents have various ways of saving user inputs as memories; some extract information and save only facts, others summarize the event and save only the summary, while others save the entire interaction, such as Letta. For most, we did not alter their design, though in the case of MemoryOS, a change was required. MemoryOS saves a conversation pair; the input is saved verbatim, and so is the agent’s response. The issue with that design is that many tasks result in a simple acknowledgment message from the agent, which creates problems with memory embeddings. To account for bare-bones responses, we changed MemoryOS to summarize its actions and tool inputs, better distinguish-ing memories from one another. 

6.2. Memory Snapshot and Utility Test Suite 

Each agent is loaded with a memory snapshot con-structed from events representing emails, calendar events, and meetings spanning five days, and fed to the agents in chronological order. We list examples of these inputs in Appendix C. Some events were also intentionally designed to change or evolve past events, such as deadline extensions. Each agent builds their own memory store, saving infor-mation on contacts, deadlines, meetings, and emails. After processing the simulated work week, we saved a snapshot of the memory state for later reuse, allowing each agent to make use of its snapshot during the experiments. To analyze the impact of our defenses, a baseline utility needed to be established for each agent, but no existing benchmark is well-suited to our use case. The closest are LoCoMo [34], HotpotQA [35], and Webshop [36], but all lack one or more aspects we sought to evaluate. None of these benchmarks focuses on evolving information, such as changing meeting times or contact information updates. Additionally, all information comes from a single source, and in the case of LoCoMo and HotpotQA, there are no tool-based evaluations, while Webshop is not fact-focused. A proper evaluation for these types of agents needs to test three things: multiple input sources, tool-based task evaluation, and events that evolve or change. To address this, we also constructed an evaluation based on the synthetic workweek. This allows us to determine the baseline utility and compare it with the utility scores for each AM-Sentry configuration. For our evaluation, we defined four categories: recall of static events, recall of evolved (changed) events, task ex-ecution using static information, and task execution using evolved information. Based on this, we can get a complete picture on agent utility and the impacts of the proposed defense mechanism. 

## 7. Evaluation 

7.1. Experiment Setup 

We ran each agent with four LLM models: GPT-5.4-mini, DeepSeek-V4-Flash, Gemini-2.5-Flash, and Llama 3.1 8B. For brevity, throughout the remainder of this section, GPT-5.4-mini, DeepSeek-V4-Flash, Gemini-2.5-Flash, and Llama-3.1-8B are referred to as ChatGPT, DeepSeek, Gem-ini, and Llama, respectively, unless otherwise specified. We set the model temperature to 0.7, where applicable. All agents use their default configurations. We ran all exper-iments on a workstation with a 13 th Gen Intel Core i9-13900K, 128 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 4080 (16 GB VRAM). We host Llama locally via Ollama using the Q4 K M quantization, and we access ChatGPT, DeepSeek, and Gemini through their respective APIs. We use each provider’s default decoding parameters across all models. All of our agents use the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embedding model [29], while the adversary uses bge-small-en-v1.5 [30]. Each experiment was repeated five times to account for random variation unless otherwise noted. 

7.2. GhostWriter Analysis 

Experiment Design: We created 16 attack scenarios, vary-ing the delivery method between email and calendar invite. For each test scenario, we used one malicious payload and tested the benign prompt once against agents with no active defense. Each scenario was tested five times, and we reported the aggregated results. We also tested two alternatives for each scenario: directive payloads , which have a more direct tone, and descriptive payloads , which describe false facts or make polite requests. Examples of each are in Appendix B; we mainly focus on the descriptive payload in this section. For each attack scenario, the agents’ memories are reset to a snapshot of a five-day workweek built by each agent, which is free of malicious memories. We evaluate Phase 1 (P1) and deem the attack suc-cessful if the malicious payload is saved in memory. We also evaluate Phase 2 (P2) of the attack, using a benign trigger to determine the malicious memory’s retrieval rate 

and activation rate after retrieval. 

Result Analysis: Our results are shown in Figure 6, where each bar cluster is organized by LLM model used by the agents, and each bar represents a memory agent architecture. Memory Injection (P1) indicates whether the adversarial payload was stored in memory. We observed 100% attack success across most agents, with an average of 98% across all agents, regardless of the LLM model used. The only agents with an attack success rate below 100% were Mem0 and ExpeL, which transform the raw content before saving it. As a result, attack payloads are not always preserved in memory for those two agents, resulting in lower attack success rates. We also see that attack retrieval is high across all agents when paired with ChatGPT and DeepSeek, ranging from 79-100% and averaging around 94% on these Figure 6: GhostWriter ’s success results, broken down into memory injection (P1) success, attack retrieval success, and attack activation success (P2). 

Figure 7: P2 activation rate (%) by category and separated by model and agent. models. Mem0 and Expel tend to have lower attack retrieval rates than the other agents, with rates as low as 57% and 65% for Gemini and Llama, respectively. This is because Gemini and Llama are less accurate when transforming the input into the memory, reducing the likelihood of matching that attack payload to the targeted benign prompt. Attack activation is high across all models, averaging 60% across all agents and LLM models. ExpeL had the lowest activation rates, ranging from 28% to 63% across all LLMs, making it the least vulnerable agent across models. This is due to ExpeL’s trajectory-based memory, which treats memories as prior examples rather than authorita-tive facts, reducing the likelihood of utilizing malicious or misleading information from poisoned memories. The only other exception is MemoryOS on Llama, with an activation rate of 42%. We observed that this agent and model com-bination struggled to even execute the requested task, as it would request more information or make incorrect tool calls, which naturally led to a lower attack activation rate. Overall, we see that the attack success rate is highest for ChatGPT and DeepSeek. Gemini and Llama are the least vulnerable to these attacks, but the attack success rate is still significant, with the lowest being ExpeL paired with Llama at 28%. Overall, the Llama model has the lowest attack activation rates, while ChatGPT and DeepSeek have the highest. We analyzed attack activation across each attack cate-gory for both directive and descriptive payloads, as shown in Figures 6a and 6b. The heatmaps show the activation Figure 7: Prompt injection results against all of our evaluated agents. Notably, ExpeL is very vulnerable to this attack. rates across four LLMs paired with various agents. With directive payloads (Figure 6a), we see that integrity cor-ruption, and covert exfiltration exhibit the highest activa-tion rates, peaking at 100% for ChatGPT, DeepSeek, and Llama. Conversely, sensitive info leakage shows the lowest overall susceptibility across all LLM models. Interestingly, for descriptive payloads (Figure 6b), we see that sensitive info leakage performs actually rates comparable to integrity corruption and covert exfiltration. Scope escalation activates at much lower rates for descriptive payloads, as this attack requires ignoring the normal bounds set by the user, such as never sending emails without review, and the attack payloads are not presented as strict instructions; the agents are more likely to treat them as optional guidelines to be ignored. In general, we also see the attack activation rates for descriptive payloads uniformly fall for integrity corruption and covert exfiltration with Llama, whereas in other models they are more varied, with some rising and others falling. 

7.3. Prompt Injection Attacks and Defenses. 

We also evaluated the impact of prompt-injection attacks on these long-term memory agents. We reused the exper-imental setup for GhostWriter , using a prompt-injection payload from the AgentDojo benchmark [12]. Our results are presented in Figure 7, which shows that prompt injection fails almost 100% of the time against most of these agents, except for ExpeL and MemoryOS. Prompt injection had ac-tivation rates of 1-22% against MemoryOS and 92% against ExpeL. ExpeL’s trajectory-based design causes it to almost always follow the directives from the prompt injection attack due to their authoritative nature. Additionally, we found that while P1 injections rate were very similar to GhostWriter ,the P2 activation rates were very low, ranging from 0% to 16.7%. This is due to low retrieval rates and the payloads being unoptimized for activation in later prompts. We also wanted to determine if prompt injection de-tection methods would filter out GhostWriter payloads. To this end, we ran our directive and descriptive payloads through two prompt-injection detection methods to evaluate whether GhostWriter can be detected by them. We used DataFilter [37], a Llama model trained to detect prompt-injection attacks, and PromptArmor [38], a prompt-only defense where we used ChatGPT. We found that DataFilter had a 0% detection rate against all of our attack payloads. Surprisingly, it was more effective to ask ChatGPT to look for prompt injection, as it actually had an 85% detection rate against our directive payloads, but that fell to only 6% against our descriptive payloads. We noticed that ChatGPT tends to classify payloads as prompt injection when they use authoritative language, which is why it can reliably detect our directive payloads. However, our descriptive pay-loads use more polite language, easily fooling this method, whereas AM-Sentry can reliably detect the attack regardless of whether the payloads are directive or descriptive. 

7.4. AM-Sentry Effectiveness 

Experiment Design: AM-Sentry has defenses at ingestion and at retrieval, so we separated the test for each phase. For the first-phase test, we compared the results of S1, S2, and 

S3 to assess their effectiveness. We also compared against A-MAC [9], using its default parameters. A-MAC is not focused on vulnerability detection, and any attack payload it blocks is incidental, as its mechanisms only evaluate the utility of saving new memories. For the second-phase test, we combine the retrieval screen with S1, S2, and S3,and compare the overall results to determine the combined effectiveness of our approach. We began by generating a new snapshot for each AM-Sentry policy configuration and reused our adversary setup from Section 7.2. We evaluated our defenses against both directive and descriptive payloads, but for brevity, we discuss only our results against descrip-tive payloads, which were the hardest to detect. 

Result Analysis: Figure 8 shows the effectiveness of our memory saving policies at preventing malicious memory injection. We first evaluate the A-MAC baseline, which was optimized solely for utility and does not consider vulnera-bility. Compared to our proposed policies, A-MAC exhibits greater variability across agents and inadvertently permits most attacks. The minimum attack success rate observed under A-MAC was 54% with an average of 84%. The lowest admission rates were under DeepSeek, which tended to score our descriptive payloads very low on utility. 

S1 admits almost everything under Gemini, but for DeepSeek and ChatGPT, it admits around 80% and 97% respectively. In contrast, Llama tends to indiscriminately overblock, considering the fact that S1 only evaluates if a given memory will be useful or not. As a result, Llama is prone to filtering both malicious and legitimate payloads, which negatively impacts the agent’s operations. 

S2 reduces the admission of poisoned memories across all models except Llama. Notably, while Llama exhibits a lower block rate under S2 than under S1, it’s less prone to blocking legitimate payloads, thereby improving the agent’s overall utility (detailed analysis in Section 7.5). ChatGPT benefits the most from S2, bringing the attack success rate down to 71% at the lowest. Gemini also benefits signifi-cantly from S2’s improved structure, reducing attack success Figure 8: Memory Saving policy performance; shows the number of malicious memories admitted by each policy into the agents’ memory store. Overall, S3 performs best at blocking poisoned memory. 

Figure 9: The total attack success rate for each policy configuration when paired with R. An attack is successful if it activates and alters the agent’s behavior. Pairing R with S1-S3 greatly improves their overall performance against GhostWriter .to between 70-84%. Conversely, DeepSeek is largely the same, and in some cases worse, because the model tends to rank the utility of our attack email fairly low. S2 is con-sistent across most agents, but performance degrades with A-Mem and MemoryOS due to their memory structures, making S2 more permissive in those agents and reducing its effectiveness. 

S3 is the most effective and consistent approach for most models. We observe improved performance across ChatGPT, DeepSeek, and Gemini, reducing the average attack success rate to 15%. A glaring exception is Llama, which seemed to struggle with the more strict, precise format of S3 admitting 77% of malicious payloads. Overall, S3 is highly effective in blocking the attack, provided it is paired with a capable LLM model. We analyzed the total attack success rates when each policy configuration ( S1-S3) is integrated with the retrieval screening ( R). Figure 9 shows the end-to-end attack success rates under the various policies. For an attack to be consid-ered successful, it must pass both the policy and the retrieval screen. In this configuration, S1 and S2 exhibit comparable performance. The addition of the retrieval screen effectively mitigates the inherent permissiveness of S1 and S2, bringing their performance to a similar level. S3 is highly effective in this combined setup, reducing the average attack success rate to below 12% across all LLMs except Llama, which averages 20% across all agents. We can see that R was able to make up for the weakness of S3 exhibited under Llama during memory injection. 

7.5. AM-Sentry Utility Analysis 

Experiment Design: In addition to evaluating the miti-gation’s effectiveness, we also evaluate the impact AM-Sentry has on each agent’s utility. This allows us to better understand the trade-off between protection and utility. For each agent across all models, we ran our test suite on the simulated work week to evaluate the agent’s recall and tool-calling accuracy. We repeated this evaluation for each 

AM-Sentry configuration and for A-MAC as an additional baseline. Each configuration created a snapshot based on the simulated work week and its memory-saving policies. In this subsection, we focus on A-Mem and present per-agent utility for the other agents in Appendix D. 

Result Analysis: The utility results for A-Mem are pre-sented in Figure 10, which gives the average utility scores for each configuration of AM-Sentry , A-MAC, and the base-line (no policy). We evaluated three metrics: F1-similarity Figure 10: Utility metrics for A-Mem showing the F1-similarity score, LLM judged scores, and tool accuracy across the baseline, A-MAC, and all six AM-Sentry configurations. Overall, AM-Sentry has minimal impact on utility. score, LLM-judge score, and tool accuracy. The F1-score measures how closely the generated answer matches a refer-ence; the LLM-judge score uses a ChatGPT model to assess answer accuracy; and tool accuracy measures how often the correct tool call was made. F1-scores remain consistent with the baseline across all LLMs, DeepSeek exhibiting the most consistent perfor-mance. A small reduction under S3 is observed compared to the baseline, but we determined that this is an accept-able trade-off for protection. The remaining models show degraded performance when paired with R or S3, ranging from 0.01 to 0.04 relative to the baseline. With Llama, we also observe a stepwise reduction in utility starting at S1,due to indiscriminate over-blocking of legitimate memories. A-MAC is a utility-focused approach, but it did not have a strong positive effect on baseline performance in our experiments; the only exception is Llama, which scores significantly higher than the other policy configurations. We attribute this to A-MAC’s policy decisions being less reliant on LLMs, whereas our approach is more reliant on LLMs to score all parameters. The LLM judged scores follow the same trend. Notably, 

S2 outperforms the baseline in several cases. Tool accuracy is likewise consistent, with one exception. For ChatGPT, we observe a drop-off under A-MAC and S1 relative to the baseline, and accuracy generally increases as the policy configuration becomes more strict. Notably, our policy con-figurations have minimal impact on overall utility, a trend that holds across other agent architectures as well, as further detailed in Appendix D. 

## 8. Limitations & Future Work 

In this paper, we focused on email and calendar in-vites as the attack surface. Other input channels, including documents, web content, and code repositories, were not explored. As an initial step in investigating this attack vector, our proposed defense relies on intuitively chosen weights in its equations, which may not be the optimal configuration for protecting against GhostWriter . Our utility benchmark is a custom test suite built around a simulated workweek rather than real user data or live deployments, and it may not capture the full range of tasks a personal assistant agent encounters in practice. Our evaluation covers five state-of-the-art memory agents, but the scope of memory architectures is broader. Agents with fundamentally different memory designs may exhibit different vulnerability profiles. We evaluated each agent using multiple models, but we were limited to those available and economically viable for us. We evaluated 

AM-Sentry against non-adaptive attackers unaware of the defense. An adaptive attacker may employ techniques to circumvent the policy checklist and retrieval screen. From these limitations, we identify the following items for future work. Investigating GhostWriter across additional input channels and deployment contexts beyond the office assistant setting. Evaluating a wider range of memory ar-chitectures and additional LLM backends. Developing a dedicated benchmark spanning diverse task types, input sources, and memory architectures. Evaluating AM-Sentry 

against adaptive attackers, performing a Monte Carlo for optimizing selection of policy weights, and attack analysis with multiple concurrent attack payloads. 

## 9. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced the novel attack vector 

GhostWriter which exploits memory systems in tool-using personal agents and poisons their memory store to steer their future behavior. We showed that it has near-universal success against current memory architectures and demonstrates high retrieval and activation rates due to the lack of security-focused memory governance. In response to these findings, we also proposed AM-Sentry , which utilized two mitigation techniques: a memory-saving policy and a retrieval screen. We show that AM-Sentry can greatly reduce the effectiveness of GhostWriter . The strictest version of AM-Sentry almost completely blocks GhostWriter across most models in our experiments. This results in a minimal drop in utility, intro-ducing an acceptable trade-off between security and utility. 

## References  

> [1] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess` ı, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Ham-bro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer:

Language models can teach themselves to use tools,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 36, pp. 68 539–68 551, 2023. [2] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin et al. , “A survey on large language model based autonomous agents,” Frontiers of Computer Science , vol. 18, no. 6, p. 186345, 2024. [3] C. Packer, V. Fang, S. Patil, K. Lin, S. Wooders, and J. Gonzalez, “MemGPT: towards LLMs as operating systems.” 2023. [4] A. Zhao, D. Huang, Q. Xu, M. Lin, Y.-J. Liu, and G. Huang, “Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, no. 17, 2024, pp. 19 632–19 642. [5] J. Kang, M. Ji, Z. Zhao, and T. Bai, “Memory os of ai agent,” in 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2025, pp. 25 972–25 981. [6] T. Kagaya, T. J. Yuan, Y. Lou, J. Karlekar, S. Pranata, A. Kinose, K. Oguri, F. Wick, and Y. You, “Rap: Retrieval-augmented planning with contextual memory for multimodal llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03610 , 2024. [7] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 [8] S. Wu, “Introducing Devin, the first AI software engineer,” https: //cognition.ai/blog/introducing- devin, March 2024, cognition AI Blog. Accessed: 2025. [9] G. Zhang, W. Jiang, X. Wang, A. Behr, K. Zhao, J. Friedman, X. Chu, and A. Anoun, “Adaptive Memory Admission Control for LLM Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04549 , 2026. [10] Z. Chen, Z. Xiang, C. Xiao, D. Song, and B. Li, “Agentpoison: Red-teaming llm agents via poisoning memory or knowledge bases,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 130 185–130 213, 2024. [11] S. Dong, S. Xu, P. He, Y. Li, J. Tang, T. Liu, H. Liu, and Z. Xiang, “Memory Injection Attacks on LLM Agents via Query-Only Interac-tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03704 , 2025. [12] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fis-cher, and F. Tram` er, “Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for llm agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 82 895–82 920, 2024. [13] T. Xie, F. Zhou, Z. Cheng, P. Shi, L. Weng, Y. Liu, T. J. Hua, J. Zhao, Q. Liu, C. Liu et al. , “Openagents: An open platform for language agents in the wild,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10634 , 2023. [14] Significant Gravitas, “AutoGPT,” https://github.com/Significant-Gra vitas/AutoGPT, 2023, accessed: 2026. [15] Y. Nakajima, “BabyAGI,” https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi, 2023, accessed: 2026. [16] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in The eleventh international conference on learning repre-sentations , 2022. [17] Anthropic, “Claude Model Card,” https://www.anthropic.com/mode l-card, 2023, accessed: 2026. [18] Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong, M. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Jin, E. Zhou et al. , “The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey,” Science China Information Sciences , vol. 68, no. 2, p. 121101, 2025. [19] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. [20] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, H. Wang, H. Wang et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 32, 2023. [21] J. S. Park, J. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior,” in Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , 2023, pp. 1–22. [22] W. Xu, Z. Liang, K. Mei, H. Gao, J. Tan, and Y. Zhang, “A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 ,2025. [23] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, E. Berman, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023,” URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366 , vol. 8, 2024. [24] L. Franceschi-Bicchierai, “Hackers hijacked instagram accounts by tricking meta ai support chatbot into granting access,” Jun. 2026, accessed: 2026-06-05. [Online]. Available: https: //techcrunch.com/2026/06/01/hackers-hijacked-instagram-accounts-b y-tricking-meta-ai-support-chatbot-into-granting-access/ [25] X. Yang, Y. He, S. Ji, B. Hooi, and J. S. Dong, “Zombie agents: Persistent control of self-evolving llm agents via self-reinforcing injections,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15654 , 2026. [26] S. S. Srivastava and H. He, “MemoryGraft: Persistent compromise of LLM agents via poisoned experience retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16962 , 2025. [27] Q. Wei, T. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Li, Z. Yin, Y. Zhan, T. Holz, Z. Lin, and X. Wang, “A-memguard: A proactive defense framework for llm-based agent memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02373 , 2025. [28] B. Klimt and Y. Yang, “The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classification research,” in European conference on machine learning .Springer, 2004, pp. 217–226. [29] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084 [30] S. Xiao, Z. Liu, P. Zhang, N. Muennighoff, D. Lian, and J.-Y. Nie, “C-pack: Packed resources for general chinese embeddings,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07597 [31] FBI Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), “Internet Crime Report 2023,” 2024, accessed: 2026-04-26. [Online]. Available: https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2023 IC3Report.pdf [32] P. Chhikara, D. Khant, S. Aryan, T. Singh, and D. Yadav, “Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term mem-ory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 , 2025. [33] Letta Team, “Letta: Build and deploy stateful agents,” https://github .com/letta-ai/letta, 2024, formerly MemGPT. [34] A. Maharana, D.-H. Lee, S. Tulyakov, M. Bansal, F. Barbieri, and Y. Fang, “Evaluating very long-term conversational memory of llm agents,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2024, pp. 13 851–13 870. [35] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, and C. D. Manning, “HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering,” in Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , 2018, pp. 2369– 2380. [36] S. Yao, H. Chen, J. Yang, and K. Narasimhan, “Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 20 744–20 757, 2022. [37] Y. Wang, S. Chen, R. Alkhudair, B. Alomair, and D. Wagner, “Defending against prompt injection with datafilter,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19207 , 2025. [38] T. Shi, K. Zhu, Z. Wang, Y. Jia, W. Cai, W. Liang, H. Wang, H. Alzahrani, J. Lu, K. Kawaguchi et al. , “Promptarmor: Sim-ple yet effective prompt injection defenses,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15219 , 2025. Figure 11: A directive attack email that uses explicit instruc-tions and autocratic language. 

## Appendix A. Ethical Considerations 

This paper studies security vulnerabilities in personal assistant agents that use long-term memory. We formal-ize and evaluate an attack setup against long-term-memory agents from the literature in a controlled environment using synthetic tasks and data; our experiments do not involve real users, sensitive user data, or third-party systems. Our evaluation is limited to author-controlled systems, and we focus on measuring the attack’s impact and developing defenses. The attack technique could be misused to com-promise deployed agents with memory systems, so we also propose and evaluate a practical mitigation that substantially reduces the attack’s effectiveness. We plan to release our codebase to support reproducibility and further defensive research. 

## Appendix B. Adversary Emails 

Figures 11 and 12 show an example of the same at-tack scenario across two payload variations, directive and descriptive. Directive payloads use more demanding and authoritative language, while descriptive payloads use more passive and polite language. While both are effective at driv-ing agent behavior once stored in memory, their activation profiles differ slightly. The descriptive payloads are more often flagged as benign, while the directive payloads raise more red flags. All of our 16 scenarios and their variations will be included in our released codebase. 

Figure 12: A descriptive attack email that introduces the malicious contact as a team member. 

## Appendix C. Synthetic Work Week 

We present five examples of inputs from our simulated workweek in Figures 13 through 17. One email is about team coordination and scheduling a lunch, while the other is a technical discussion on a current issue. Our workweek consists of 32 events, combining both emails and calendar invites. All of these events are organized into a timeline of events and fed to the agents in chronological order. These inputs will be included in our released codebase. 

## Appendix D. Remaining AM-Sentry Utility Analysis 

Figure 18 outlines the remaining utility results not in-cluded in the main paper. Overall, the trends align with those seen in A-Mem with a few notable exceptions. Llama tends to show much more weakness and variability for these agents. In particular, MemoryOS shows high variance when paired with Llama, while ExpeL and Letta degrade in perfor-mance as we switch between policy configurations. ExpeL, in general, also seems to suffer as policy configurations grow more strict. Figure 13: An internal email from a colleague coordinating a team lunch. 

Figure 14: An email from a developer discussing imple-mentation options for API rate limiting and reporting a pagination bug. 

Figure 15: A calendar event for a team lunch. 

Figure 16: A calendar update moving the date for a client demo. 

Figure 17: An announcement notifying the change in loca-tion for the daily standup meeting. Figure 18: Utility metrics for Mem0, Letta, Expel, and MemoryOS. Showcasing the F1 similarity score, LLM judged scores, and tool accuracy across the baseline, A-MAC, and all six AM-Sentry configurations.