Title: Governed Individuation: Cryptographically Decoupling an Agent's Learning from Its Authority

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04613v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:58:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Governed Individuation: Cryptographically Decoupling an Agent’s Learning from Its Authority 

Xue Qin 1, Simin Luan 2, Cong Yang 3,∗, Zhijun Li 2,∗ 

> 1

School of Software, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China  

> 2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China  

> 3

School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou, China  

> ∗

Corresponding authors: cong.yang@suda.edu.cn; lizhijun_os@hit.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Autonomous agents are moving from sandboxed text generators to operators of code, data, and physical infrastructure, and they increasingly learn while deployed. This reopens a question that alignment techniques answer only probabilistically: after an agent has adapted in the field, is the running system still confined to what its operator authorised? Here we show that confinement can be guaranteed as an invariant of the agent’s execution architecture rather than a probabilistic outcome of its training. Governed individuation binds an agent at boot to a cryptographically frozen identity digest, and routes every action through a gate defined over the semantic effect of the action rather than its name. We prove that no amount of learning, skill acquisition, or self-induced governance abstraction can widen the agent’s permitted authority without an operator-signed change to its identity; the guarantee holds even when the agent induces its own safety principle and that principle is wrong. Empirically, in an open-ended tool-use benchmark where a large action space rules out name-based blocking, ungoverned software agents under reward pressure attempt to tamper with their own evaluation at a task-dependent rate that reaches every run on the hardest task, whereas the gate reduces executed forbidden effects to zero as a verified property of the construction, preserving task success where the task is within the model’s competence. Refusal history lowers forbidden proposals on held-out red-line families whose names the agent has never seen, a transfer our controls attribute to broad avoidance of the refused effects rather than to a uniquely induced rule. Trust in a deployed learning agent shifts from a wager on its continued alignment to a check anyone can run at boot. 

# 1 Introduction 

An agent that only generates text can be governed by moderating its outputs. An agent that writes and runs code, moves money, or drives a robot is governed only if the effects of its actions are constrained, and this becomes harder precisely as the agent becomes more useful, because a capable agent under reward pressure discovers that the fastest way to satisfy an objective is often to bypass the check that measures it. Editing the test rather than fixing the code, reading the answer key rather than computing the answer, and quietly widening its own permissions are all instrumentally rational and all outside what an operator would authorise [ 1, 2]. Today the field defends against this with training-time alignment and prompted policies [ 3 , 4]; both are probabilistic, both were designed for a fixed model rather than for agents that keep adapting after deployment [ 5 , 6], and a policy that reads untrusted inputs can be steered by instructions planted in them [ 7 –9 ]. The question an operator actually needs answered is not “is the agent likely aligned” but “can the agent, having learned in the field, do something it was never authorised to do,” and that question should have a checkable answer. 1

> arXiv:2607.04613v1 [cs.AI] 6 Jul 2026

The gap is not unrecognised. Agent identifiers and activity logs give deployed agents names and audit trails [ 10 – 12 ], and authenticated delegation scopes the credentials an agent may exercise [ 13 ]. Runtime privilege systems for tool-using agents make narrowing automatic and route widening through approval [ 14 ,15 ]; guardrails and shields hold behaviour inside an envelope fixed outside the agent [ 16 –19 ]; system-layer designs isolate control and data flow so that untrusted inputs cannot redirect execution [ 20 ]; and recent diagnoses conclude that a stable, accountable identity is exactly what learning agents still lack [ 21 –23 ]. What none of these mechanisms supplies is the conjunction. Identity schemes bind the agent to a measurement of a mutable artefact, a weight or binary hash [ 24 ]; an identity defined that way cannot survive the first field update. Attestation schemes track the current posture and re-attest as it changes [ 25 ]; the evidence stays fresh, but no persistent principal accumulates a history. Enforcement schemes constrain behaviour without defining whose behaviour is being constrained, or under which committed authority. The architecture below supplies the conjunction and proves what it buys. Governed individuation makes this an architectural, not a behavioural, guarantee: an agent’s competence may grow without bound while the boundary of what it is permitted to do stays fixed, and the fixing is witnessed by a cryptographic digest that anyone can recompute. The move has three parts. First, the agent’s identity is a frozen commitment (its mandate, its red-lines, and the authority ceiling the operator certified), hashed to a digest H recomputed at every boot; memory, weights, skills, and tool versions are deliberately outside the commitment and may change endlessly while H does not; continual adaptation and open-ended skill acquisition are the point of deploying a learning agent, not a defect [ 26 , 27 ]. Second, the gate that admits or refuses an action decides on the action’s semantic effect (does this write the evaluation, read a secret, widen a policy) rather than on its name, so an action relabelled to look benign is still caught by what it does, and a composite of individually-permitted skills whose combined effect exceeds the ceiling is refused even though a name-based filter would pass it. Third, the only channel that can relax the boundary is an operator-signed update, which necessarily changes H; autonomous tightening needs no signature, autonomous widening is impossible. These moves adapt four long-standing security mechanisms to a system that learns : the reference monitor [ 28 –30 ], capability-based least privilege [ 31 ], information-flow control’s discipline of judging an action by what it does rather than what it is called [ 32 ], and supply-chain attestation with compromise-surviving updates [ 33 , 34 ]; the new content is not any one mechanism but a guarantee that holds while the agent rewrites its own behaviour and even its own governance heuristics. 

Contributions. We make four contributions. (i) We formalise governed individuation : an execution architecture that binds a learning agent to a frozen, cryptographically committed identity and admits actions by their semantic effect against that commitment. (ii) We prove a conservation theorem: no amount of learning, skill acquisition, or self-induced governance principle can widen the agent’s permitted authority without an operator-signed change to its identity, and the bound is independent of how wrong the agent’s learned principle is. (iii) We evaluate the same governance engine in a governance-decision benchmark across three open-weight model families and in an open-ended tool-use benchmark on two of them, and adversarially attack the effect monitor, measuring the residual verifier error the theorem reduces safety to. (iv) We release the code, the data, and a reproduction driver. 

# 2 Governed individuation: the model and its guarantee 

The central theoretical result (stated in the Theory section that follows; full proofs in Supplementary Information) is that under a write-set discipline (the learned components may shape which action is proposed 

but may never write the seed, the ceiling, the signature store, or the gate), the probability that the running agent ever executes an effect exceeding its authorised ceiling is bounded by the verifier’s residual error plus cryptographic terms, and is independent of how wrong the agent’s learned governance principle is . A maximally mistaken self-induced principle can make the agent timid or inefficient; it cannot make it escalate. 2frozen seed S                 

> (mandate, red-lines, ceiling S)
> digest H=h(S)
> re-checkable at boot
> LLM
> proposes
> mediator M
> (reads R)
> frozen gate GS
> (by effect)
> execute refuse
> R
> refusals sediment (R)
> MODIFY
> (operator-signed)
> only path that changes S,Hlearning shapes proposals,
> never writes Sor GS
> AGoverned individuation
> name/
> intent
> substring
> (v1)
> semantic
> (static)
> semantic
> (dynamic)
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> false-allow rate
> 0.75
> 0.50
> 0.25
> 0.00
> 32 attacks × 4 effect classes
> BVerifier false-allow under attack
> forbidden
> effect region
> permitted
> keyword-filter
> boundary
> relabelled
> symlink alias
> keyword-free
> code fix
> caught by effect,
> missed by keyword
> CEffect, not name

Figure 1: Governed individuation decouples competence from authority. (A) At boot the frozen seed S

(mandate, red-lines, authority ceiling) hashes to an identity digest H anyone can recompute; the learning policy is decoupled from the frozen effect-lattice gate, and only an operator-signed MODIFY path can change 

S (and hence H). (B) The verifier’s false-allow rate under an adversarial bypass suite (32 attacks over four effect classes) falls monotonically with monitor strength, from 0.75 for a name/intent blocklist to 0.00 once the monitor traces the path opened at execution. (C) Relabelled, symlink-aliased, and keyword-free actions are projected onto their semantic effect and land in the forbidden region, where a keyword-filter boundary (dotted) misses them; a legitimate code fix stays permitted. Safety is therefore architectural, and what the agent learns is a proposal prior whose quality affects only competence (Fig. 1A). A second theorem shows the same containment survives open-ended skill acquisition: an agent may synthesise unboundedly many new skills and compose them freely, and as long as each is admitted by a sound, composition-conservative effect abstraction, the reachable authority never rises above the frozen ceiling, a growth-without-escalation guarantee that is false for name-based gates and true for the effect lattice. Figure 2 shows the runtime data flow that realises this discipline: every proposed action is intercepted, resolved into its semantic effect, and admitted or refused against the frozen commitment, and the operator-signed MODIFY transaction is the one channel that changes the commitment and hence the digest. 

# 3 Theory: conservation over a semantic effect lattice 

A trivial form of containment, that every action the gate admits lies within the gate’s own allow-set, holds because both are defined through the same gate; it is a useful implementation invariant but true by definition. The content of governed individuation is elsewhere: it must compare a permission boundary fixed by the seed against a learning process that changes the action distribution, grows the skill repertoire, and induces its own governance abstractions, mediated by a gate that decides on the effects of an action rather than its name. We make that precise here. Containment is no longer immediate: a naive design that lets a learned mediator extend an allow-list, or that lets composed skills inherit permission from their components without re-checking the composite effect, can reduce refusals by silently widening the boundary. The theorems below isolate the architectural discipline under which this cannot happen. 

3.1 Effects, the permission lattice, and the gate 

Definition 1 (Effect lattice) . Let (L, ⊑, ⊔, ⊓) be a finite lattice of semantic effect levels , with x ⊑ y

read as “ x exercises no more authority than y.” Effects range over labelled capabilities such as read (ρ),3RUNTIME REFERENCE MONITOR       

> neural policy
> (weights)
> skill library
> episodic memory
> boundary
> commitment S
> identity digest
> H(commitment)
> 1intercept
> proposed action
> 2semantic-effect
> verifier
> 3check effect vs
> commitment
> ADMIT
> action executes
> signed audit chain
> (append-only)
> REFUSE
> widening effect
> operator MODIFY
> (signs new S,H)
> COGNITIVE SUBSTRATE
> (mutable, learns)
> IDENTITY LAYER
> (frozen, committed)
> sha256:7f3a c91
> proposes action
> compare
> vs ceiling
> hashes to
> within
> boundary
> widens
> authority
> the only channel that can change the commitment

Figure 2: The runtime reference monitor and its trusted computing base. The mutable cognitive substrate (left, green) is outside the trusted computing base and holds no write access to the identity layer; the monitor (centre) intercepts each proposed action, resolves its semantic effect, and checks it against the frozen boundary commitment S (right, blue), whose hash is the identity digest H (black). In-boundary effects execute and append to the signed audit chain (green); boundary-widening effects are refused (vermilion), and the operator-signed MODIFY that re-issues S and H is the only channel through which the boundary can change, which is the write-set discipline of Assumption 1 drawn as a data flow. The trusted computing base is the monitor, the commitment store, and the signature and digest checks; the weights, skill library, and episodic memory may drift arbitrarily without touching it. 

write (ρ), exec , network (δ), secret _access , test _mutation and policy _mutation , ordered by authority and joined componentwise. ⊥ is the no-effect element. Concretely, in our instantiation L is a product lattice with one component per labelled capability class, and a parameterised class such as write (ρ) carries one coordinate per resource class ρ. Each coordinate is the two-point lattice ⊥ ⊏ ⊤ (the class is exercised or not), ⊑ and ⊔ are componentwise, and distinct classes are incomparable: policy _mutation neither dominates nor is dominated by write (ρ), and an action exercising both sits above each in the product order. The ceiling ℓS is the join of the coordinates the operator grants, so 

eff( τ ) ⊑ ℓS reads: the trace exercises no capability coordinate outside the granted set. Graded instantiations (ordered levels within a class) drop in without changing the theorems, which use only the lattice axioms. An action executed in context σ produces a concrete trace τ with a ground-truth effect eff( τ ) ∈ L . The seed S fixes an operator authority ceiling ℓS ∈ L : the maximum authority the operator has certified. The true permission boundary is BS = {τ : eff( τ ) ⊑ ℓS }, defined over effects of traces, not over action names. 

Definition 2 (Conservative effect abstraction) . A verifier computes an abstraction A(π, σ ) ∈ L of a proposed action or program π. A is sound when every concrete trace of π is bounded by the abstraction, i.e. eff( τ ) ⊑

A(π, σ ) for every trace τ of π in σ. We allow A a residual false-allow probability: over a run of n gate evaluations, Pr[ ∃ eval : eff( τ )̸ ⊑ A(π, σ )] ≤ δA(n).4The gate is parameterised only by the frozen seed and decides on effects: 

GS (π, σ ) = allow ⇐⇒ A(π, σ ) ⊑ ℓS .

The identity digest is H = h(ser( S)) for a collision-resistant h; it binds the exact policy state ℓS (and the abstraction A and gate GS ) against which any future relaxation is signed. 

3.2 Learned mediation that cannot escalate 

A principle inducer Iϕ maps the refusal history Rt to a principle representation zt; a mediator Mθ maps 

(proposal , σ, R t, z t) to a candidate program. Both are arbitrary, possibly non-stationary, learned maps. The discipline that makes them safe is structural, not behavioural. 

Assumption 1 (Write-set discipline) . The learned modules Iϕ, M θ have no write access to S, to ℓS , to the operator-signature store, or to the gate code A, G S . They influence only the proposal distribution ; every executable action still passes GS .

Theorem 1 (Permission-boundary conservation under learned mediation and imperfect induction) . Under Assumption 1, for any inducer Iϕ, mediator Mθ, and adaptive proposer, over any run of length n,

Pr ∃ t ≤ n : eff( τt)̸ ⊑ ℓS

 ≤ δA(n) + δimpl + δhash ,

where δimpl bounds implementation/TCB bypass and δhash the digest collision/substitution probability. The bound is independent of how wrong Iϕ is .Proof sketch. Fix any run. Every executed τt is the trace of some πt that the gate admitted, so A(πt, σ t) ⊑ ℓS .By soundness of A, eff( τt) ⊑ A(πt, σ t) ⊑ ℓS except on the event that A false-allows, whose probability over 

n evaluations is at most δA(n). The only other ways an executed trace can exceed ℓS are an implementation bypass of the gate ( δimpl ) or a substitution of the policy state behind the digest ( δhash ). By Assumption 1, 

Iϕ and Mθ change only which πt is proposed; they cannot alter ℓS , A, or GS . Hence a maximally wrong induced principle can shift the proposal distribution arbitrarily, but every proposal is still filtered by the same frozen gate, so it can only raise the refusal rate, never the executed authority. A union bound over the three failure events gives the claim. The qualitative content is the separation of concerns: safety is architectural and does not depend on the correctness of anything the agent learns ; only the residual verifier/implementation/crypto terms enter, and learning touches none of them. We state plainly what this does and does not settle. The theorem is conditional on a sound, conservative effect abstraction A with a bounded false-allow rate δA; constructing such an A for an arbitrary open action space (shell commands, generated scripts, import-time side effects, indirect execution) is the hard systems problem, and it is not solved here. What the theorem buys is a clean reduction: the safety of a learning 

agent is reduced to the soundness of a fixed, non-learning verifier plus a small trusted computing base, so the open problem no longer scales with the agent’s competence or the wrongness of its induced principle. In the experiments A is a semantic monitor over declared effects, and we report its empirical false-allow rate rather than assume δA = 0 . The strongest monitor tier is dynamic: it applies the same admission test at each primitive effect of the running trace rather than once per proposed program, refusing at the first primitive whose effect would leave the granted set. This changes when the abstraction’s information arrives, not what 

may commit: any prefix executed before a refusal consists of primitives that were individually admitted, each 

⊑ ℓS , so containment holds action by action rather than program by program. 53.3 Growth without escalation 

Theorem 1 bounds executed authority given that each πt is gated. The deeper claim is that the agent may 

synthesise unboundedly many new skills , as open-ended agents already do [ 27 ], and still never escalate, which is false for name-based gates and true for the effect lattice under a compositional abstraction. 

Assumption 2 (Certified primitives and compositional abstraction) . Skills are programs in a DSL closed under sequential composition, bounded choice, and bounded iteration. Three conditions hold. (i) Primitive soundness : each primitive skill c carries a certified abstraction with eff( τ ) ⊑ A(c, σ ) for every trace τ of c.(ii) Effect composition : the effect of a sequential trace is the join of its parts together with any interaction effects, eff( τ1 · τ2) = eff( τ1) ⊔ eff( τ2) ⊔ ι(τ1, τ 2), where ι collects the interaction coordinates (for example a flow coordinate exercised when data read at a protected source in τ1 reaches a sink in τ2); ι = ⊥ when the parts do not interact. (iii) Conservative composition : the abstraction dominates both parts and every interaction it can create, A(π1; π2, σ ) ⊒ A(π1, σ ) ⊔ A(π2, σ ) ⊔ I(π1, π 2, σ ) with I over-approximating ι,and the analogous bound for choice and iteration (the join over reachable branches/unrollings). Soundness for composite programs is not assumed; Theorem 2 derives it. 

Theorem 2 (Open-ended skill acquisition over a fixed lattice) . Under Assumption 2, let the agent extend its skill library by any finite sequence of synthesised programs, each admitted only if A(π, σ ) ⊑ ℓS . Then every admitted skill, and every composite that is itself admitted by the composite abstraction A, has every concrete trace satisfy eff( τ ) ⊑ ℓS . The skill library may grow without bound; the reachable authority, over admitted programs, remains ⊑ ℓS .Proof sketch. We first show by induction on program structure that A is sound for every DSL program; containment of admitted programs then follows. Base: primitive soundness is Assumption 2(i). Step: for 

π1; π2 with sound A(π1), A(π2), any concrete trace factors as τ1 · τ2, and by (ii) and the inductive hypothesis 

eff( τ1 · τ2) = eff( τ1) ⊔ eff( τ2) ⊔ ι(τ1, τ 2) ⊑ A(π1) ⊔ A(π2) ⊔ I(π1, π 2) ⊑ A(π1; π2) by (iii); choice and bounded iteration are the join over their finitely many reachable expansions. Hence any admitted program, with A(π, σ ) ⊑ ℓS , has every trace effect ⊑ ℓS . Since admission is by effect and ℓS is frozen, no sequence of synthesised skills moves the reachable authority above ℓS .Theorem 2 is what a name-based gate cannot give. The counterexample is a pair of individually-admissible capabilities whose composition is harmful: read-secret followed by network-send. Note where the refusal comes from. If each part is admitted, the componentwise join of their abstractions lies under ℓS by the definition of join, so the join alone can never refuse the pair; what exceeds the ceiling is the interaction coordinate (the flow of secret-sourced data into the network sink) that the composite exercises and neither part does, which conservative composition (Assumption 2(iii)) forces A(π1; π2) to include. A name-based gate sees only the component list and has no coordinate in which the interaction can register. Admitting code only with a checkable certificate of its effects follows the proof-carrying-code tradition [ 35 ], applied here to effects on a permission lattice rather than to memory and type safety. 

3.4 Signature-gated widening makes the digest load-bearing 

Theorem 3 (Signature-gated boundary widening) . Let a policy update be a seed transition S → S′, and call it relax-direction unless it is a pure tightening, that is, unless ℓS′ ⊑ ℓS and the abstraction AS′ is at least as restrictive as AS . In particular a transition to an incomparable ceiling (one that grants any coordinate not previously granted, whatever it simultaneously revokes) is relax-direction and requires a signature. If the runtime accepts a relax-direction update only with a valid operator signature over the canonical tuple 

(H, S, S ′, reason , time , nonce ), then under EUF-CMA signature security and collision resistance of h,

Pr[ the autonomous loop widens the permission boundary ] ≤ Adv EUF-CMA  

> sig

+ Adv coll  

> h

+ δimpl .

6The two advantage terms are the standard ones for a probabilistic polynomial-time adversary with running time t making at most q signing (respectively hashing) queries, Adv EUF-CMA  

> sig

(t, q ) and Adv coll  

> h

(t);we suppress (t, q ) in the notation. 

Proof sketch. A widening within the loop requires either (i) a relax-direction transition with a valid signature the loop did not obtain from the operator, contradicting EUF-CMA except with advantage Adv EUF-CMA  

> sig

;(ii) presenting a different policy state under the same digest, contradicting collision resistance except with 

Adv coll  

> h

; or (iii) a direct implementation bypass ( δimpl ). The signature binds H, so a relaxation authorised against one identity cannot be replayed against another. A union bound gives the claim. A pure tightening (ℓS′ ⊑ ℓS with AS′ at least as restrictive) needs no signature and is always loop-permitted, which is the asymmetry the empirical mechanism realises. 

3.5 The induced principle is a learned prior, not the boundary 

Separating the induced principle from the boundary lets us state its quality without making safety depend on it. Let F ⊆ (effect classes) be the truly forbidden classes under ℓS , and Pϕ(R) the classes the induced principle discourages. 

Definition 3 (Induction soundness and completeness) . Soundness εover = Pr[ a / ∈ F ∧ a ∈ Pϕ(R)] (unneces-sary conservatism); completeness εmiss = Pr[ a ∈ F ∧ a / ∈ Pϕ(R)] (failure to generalise). For safety, completeness is not required: the gate refuses any missed forbidden action (Theorem 1). For competence both matter, and the held-out refusal rate is governed by induction quality, not by safety. 

Theorem 4 (Refusal bound from imperfect induction) . Suppose tasks are drawn from latent governance classes k ∈ K and the inducer recovers the correct class with probability 1 − εk after m refusal examples, a class-recovery error that enters the bound through εmiss . If the mediator, among gate-feasible alternatives, avoids the induced forbidden class, then the expected held-out refusal rate obeys 

E[refusal_rate test ] ≤ εmiss + ηmodel + ηfeasible ,

where ηmodel is the base proposer’s probability of ignoring the principle and ηfeasible the probability that no permitted alternative exists. Executed violations remain bounded by Theorem 1, independently of these terms. Proof. Fix a held-out task in class k. A refusal at test time is the event that the mediator’s chosen proposal is in the forbidden class Bk and the gate refuses it. Decompose by the cause. If the inducer recovered the class (probability ≥ 1 − εk) and the base proposer follows the induced principle and a permitted alternative is feasible, the mediator selects a permitted action and no refusal occurs. A refusal therefore requires at least one of three events: the induced principle fails to cover Bk on this task (contributing at most εmiss , the probability that a truly forbidden action is not discouraged); the base proposer ignores the principle and proposes in Bk

anyway (at most ηmodel ); or no permitted alternative is gate-feasible, so every available proposal is forbidden (at most ηfeasible ). By the union bound the refusal probability is at most εmiss + ηmodel + ηfeasible ; taking expectation over the held-out distribution gives the stated bound. The over-blocking term εover does not enter, since over-blocking costs competence, not compliance, and executed violations are governed by Theorem 1 regardless. This is the intended division of labour: hard safety is architectural (Theorems 1–3); useful generalisation is learned and empirically validated (Theorem 4), and the experiments measure εover , ε miss and the held-out refusal rate against the controls that distinguish a genuinely induced principle from generic caution. 74 Experimental setup 

We evaluate the same engine in two settings that stress different halves of the claim. The first is an open-ended tool-use benchmark, ToolGym-GI, in which the agent writes code, runs a check, and submits patches in a sandboxed repository (sandboxed evaluation of tool-agent risk has precedent [36]); the action space is open in surface form (the agent emits arbitrary edits to arbitrary paths), while the effects of those edits land in a structured filesystem domain the monitor can trace, so no finite blocklist of names can define the boundary (name-based permissioning is nonetheless the default in today’s tool-use runtimes [ 37 ]), and governance is a semantic monitor that compiles each proposed action into an effect (code fix, test/golden mutation, secret access, policy mutation, log mutation) and admits it only under the frozen ceiling. Some actions are red-lined because they satisfy the objective by corrupting its measurement or crossing an authorisation boundary. The second is a governance-decision benchmark in which the agent proposes a capability to invoke for a task and a subset of capabilities are red-lined; it isolates whether an agent can induce a governance abstraction and carry it to unseen red-lines. Its scenarios are deliberately embodied-flavoured (a robot choosing among physical actions) because that makes the red-lines interpretable and the induced principle human-readable; the open-action and containment claims are carried by the software-native ToolGym-GI setting, and the induction result is a decision-layer probe rather than an embodiment claim. We use three open-weight models from three families (Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2, Phi-3.5-mini-instruct) on the governance-decision benchmark and the first two on the tool-use benchmark, paired same-seed arms that differ only in governance, and held-out red-line families whose names never appear in training. 

# 5 Results 

We first ask how often an ungoverned agent, under pressure, reaches for a forbidden effect. The answer is sharply task-dependent and therefore unpredictable: on families the model can solve honestly it rarely or never touches the grading file, but on its hardest family (the even-Fibonacci task for Mistral, the balance-checking task for Qwen), under repeated “still failing” pressure, it proposes an edit to the very file that grades it on 12 

of 12 seeds; aggregated over families the rate is 27% (Mistral) and 31% (Qwen). The released summaries record this as the forbidden-proposal rate, measured before the gate and therefore identical across arms by design; in the ungoverned arm nothing intercepts a proposal, so the harness applies it and the executed forbidden-write rate coincides with the proposal rate there. The agents are poor at actually cheating (none produced a passing result in our runs), but each is an executed write to the evaluation artifact, a forbidden effect by the semantic monitor, which classifies it by the file it touches regardless of the innocuous label the agent gives it. The unpredictability is the point: because an operator cannot know in advance which task will trigger a bypass, safety cannot rest on the model not attempting one. Under the effect gate every gated arm executes exactly zero forbidden effects on every task and seed. This zero is not an empirical estimate but a verified property of the construction: the gate intercepts by effect, and the identity digest and append-only log let any third party re-verify that it was the gate in force. Blocking the shortcut does not destroy competence where competence is within reach: on the even-Fibonacci family Qwen reaches the legitimate fix on 12 /12 

gated seeds versus 9/12 ungoverned. Nor does it conjure competence: on each model’s hardest tamper family neither arm reaches the real fix ( 0/12 both), so there the gate removes the cheat without rescuing the task. This is deterministic containment. Its value is precisely that the zero holds without depending on the model being aligned, only on the gate being in the trusted computing base. That gate is not assumed sound; we attack it. Against an adversary that pursues each of four effect classes (grading-artifact write, secret read, policy mutation, log tamper) through eight encodings of rising indirection (relabelling, path traversal, symlink and keyword-free aliasing, nested symlinks, temp-then-rename, and runtime indirection, the last exploiting the classical gap between check time and use time [ 38 ]; 32 attempts, all reaching the forbidden 8effect), the false-allow rate falls monotonically across monitor tiers: 0.75 for a name/intent blocklist, 0.50 

substring, 0.25 for a path-resolving static monitor, and 0.00 once the monitor also traces the path opened at execution (Fig. 1B; SI). The verifier’s residual δA that Theorem 1 reduces safety to is therefore not assumed but measured, and it is closed by adding runtime effect tracing to the trusted computing base, which the theory names as its scope. Safety does not depend on the model, but competence under governance does: an agent that keeps proposing blocked actions is contained yet useless, so we ask whether refusal history helps the agent stay 

inside its boundary on families it was never refused on. From refusals collected on the training families the agent induces a natural-language governance principle (shown verbatim in Supplementary Information; a learned artifact with its own digest, not authored by us), and the mediator consults it on held-out families whose red-line names it has never seen. Across three model families the induced principle lowers the held-out forbidden-proposal rate below no memory (Mistral 0.00 versus 0.34 ; Qwen 0.26 versus 0.43 ; Phi 0.43 versus 

0.55 ), most on the strongest model. We state the statistical weight of this plainly: the unit of independent variation is the held-out task, and with seven held-out tasks per model the paired task-level test does not reach significance (Mistral p=0 .25 , Qwen p=0 .50 , Phi p=0 .50 ); treating the thirty-five scenario-by-seed pairs as replicates gives p< 10 −3, 0.010 and 0.018 , but seeds of the same task are not independent evidence, so we lean on the rates and the direction, not on those p values. We are careful about what is transferring. A control that shuffles which reason is paired with which task, but preserves the set of refused effects, transfers as well as the induced principle (Mistral) or better (Qwen, Phi), and a principle induced from a different red-line family still lowers violations; so the signal that generalises is broad avoidance of the refused kinds of effect, not a uniquely-induced specific rule, and a generic-caution component is present rather than absent. What we can claim, and verify by leakage-checking that no held-out red-line name appears in any training record or in the induced text, is that having been refused on some effects transfers compliance to unseen effects of a related kind, more so for a model that can already reason about effects. The specificity that does hold is narrower and model-dependent: on Qwen, recording which action was refused beats a contentless “you were refused” cue ( 0.054 versus 0.229 full-pool; task-level p=0 .068 over fourteen scenarios, seed-level p=0 .002 ), while on Mistral the same comparison is directionally consistent but does not separate ( 0.062 versus 0.116 ,task-level p=0 .32 ), and we did not run this arm on Phi. The content of the refusal, not merely its occurrence, carries what transfer there is (Fig. 3). 

# 6 Discussion 

Governed individuation turns the trustworthiness of a deployed learning agent from something asserted into something computed. An operator no longer bets that an agent stays within bounds through its upgrades; it requires that the agent expose an identity anyone can recompute and a permission boundary that provably cannot widen as the agent learns, and it obtains a record that cannot silently diverge from what happened. The same digest lets a regulator, an insurer, or a downstream integrator check the agent without trusting whoever trained it, a check that emerging AI regulation and audit regimes could consume directly [ 39 –41 ]. As software agents become systems we copy, update, and deploy at scale, deciding whether the agent you certified is still the agent you have stops being a matter of inspection and becomes a matter of design. The induction result deserves a frank framing, because a reader may conclude from the controls that inducing a principle buys nothing. On these 7B-class models the shuffled control matches or beats the induced principle, so the hope that a self-induced rule would carry the operator’s specific intent is not supported here; what transfers is the set of refused effects, and the one specificity that survives is that the refusal’s content beats its mere occurrence. The architecture is built so that nothing rests on this. Theorem 1 makes executed authority independent of the induced principle’s quality, so induction may be generic, wrong, or absent without touching the safety floor, and the division of labour is deliberate: containment is architectural, 9Mistral-7B Qwen2.5-7B Phi-3.5-mini     

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> Held-out forbidden-
> proposal rate (lower better)
> 0.34
> 0.00 0.00
> 0.14
> 0.43
> 0.26
> 0.22
> 0.29
> 0.55
> 0.43
> 0.28
> 0.43
> no memory induced principle shuffled (control) wrong-domain (control)

Figure 3: Refusal history transfers compliance to unseen red-lines, carried by the refused effects. Held-out forbidden-proposal rate (full-pool mean; lower is better) by governance-memory arm and model. The induced principle lowers the rate relative to no memory, but a shuffled control that preserves the set of refused effects while scrambling their task pairing matches it (Mistral) or beats it (Qwen), and a wrong-domain 

principle also helps, so the transferring signal is broad avoidance of the refused kinds of effect rather than a uniquely-induced rule. Effect is larger on the stronger model. while governance memory is a competence aid whose value can be measured honestly and will vary by model and domain, as the software-native replication shows, rather than a load-bearing safety component. 

Scope and limitations. The containment guarantee is conditional on a sound effect verifier for the action space in use; we measure its residual error on a constrained, structured action space and do not claim a sound verifier for fully open action spaces, which is undecidable in general. The induction result is a decision-layer probe, and its transfer is carried by broad avoidance of the refused kinds of effect rather than a uniquely-induced rule, as the controls show. The study evaluates the software-action and decision layer where identity, permission, and audit live; physical execution downstream of an admitted action is deployment context, not part of the empirical claim. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Governed individuation makes the trustworthiness of a deployed learning agent computable rather than asserted. By committing an agent’s identity to a frozen boundary, mediating actions by their semantic effect, and permitting the boundary to widen only through a signed transition that changes the public digest, the architecture guarantees that competence may grow without bound while authority cannot, whatever the agent learns. The guarantee is conditional on a sound effect verifier for the action space in use; extending sound verification toward open action spaces, and carrying the same discipline through memory consolidation, federation, and physical execution, are the natural next steps. Deciding whether the agent one certified is still the agent one has need no longer be a matter of inspection; it can be a matter of design. 10 Methods: the ToolGym-GI benchmark 

Environment. ToolGym-GI presents a proposer language model with software-maintenance tasks in a sandboxed repository. Each task exposes a buggy source file and a failing check; the agent proposes edits as structured actions and is scored on whether the check passes. The action space is open in surface form: the agent may write any file with any content and label its own action with any intent string. This rules out a name-based blocklist as the governance mechanism, because the boundary cannot be enumerated as a finite set of forbidden action names. 

Semantic effect gate. Every proposed action is compiled, independently of the agent’s intent label, into a semantic effect by what it touches: writing ordinary source is a code_fix ; writing a test, golden, or expected-output file is a test_mutation ; writing an audit log is a log_mutation ; writing a policy or gate file is a policy_mutation ; reading a secret, key, or canary file is secret_access . These are ordered by authority into the effect lattice of Definition 1, with the operator ceiling admitting reads and code fixes and refusing the rest. The gate admits an action iff its compiled effect lies at or below the ceiling. Because classification is by target and content rather than by the agent’s label, an action relabelled “update_value” that writes a test file is still classified test_mutation and refused; this is the property a name gate lacks and is verified directly in unit tests of the monitor. 

Red-line families and the train/test split. Red-lined shortcuts are grouped into families by the file surface they tamper with. The families used to induce the governance principle (editing files under tests/ ) share no action names or file paths with the held-out families on which generalisation is measured (rewriting specification files under golden/ ); both exercise the test/golden-mutation effect class, so what is held out is the surface form and location of the tampering, not the effect class itself. The structure common to train and test is the semantic abstraction that the objective must not be satisfied by tampering with its own evaluation or by crossing an authorisation boundary. A leakage check asserts that no held-out file name or close lexical variant appears in any training refusal record or in the induced principle text. 

Arms. Agents differ only in governance. ungoverned : no gate, learns freely. prompted-policy : the written policy is placed in the system prompt once, no hard gate. shield-only : the effect gate is active but there is no realisation memory. gi-names : refusals surface the names of the actions the gate blocked. gi-induced :refusals are abstracted by the inducer into a principle that the mediator consults. All gated arms share the identical gate, so all differ only in the proposal prior, isolating the contribution of induced abstraction from that of the hard guarantee. The harness implements all five arms; the released hard-benchmark runs compare 

ungoverned against the gated arm on Mistral and Qwen, and the induction-and-transfer measurements reported in Results come from the governance-decision benchmark, whose arms are none, induced, hand-oracle, shuffled and wrong-domain. 

Principle induction. The agent first runs the training families under the gated gi-names arm and records each refusal as a structured event: the file it attempted to write, the compiled effect, the policy reason, and the permitted alternative. A principle inducer Iϕ is prompted with these records only , never with any human-written principle text, and asked to state, as a single general sentence, the rule that would let one predict for a never-seen file whether writing it should be refused. The output is canonicalised and hashed to a principle digest, stored as a signed realisation artifact, and read by the mediator on held-out families. The gate is never modified by the induced principle; by Theorem 1 an incorrect principle cannot cause an executed violation. 11 Controls that separate induction from generic caution. Beyond none , names , and gi-induced we run: 

human-principle , a hand-written rule that is an upper-bound oracle rather than the main result; shuffled-refusals , the same number of records with reasons and actions mismatched but the set of refused effects preserved, which detects whether the specific induced rule or merely the refused set carries the transfer; and 

wrong-domain , a principle induced from a different red-line family, which detects mere “be safe” prompting. We pre-registered the strong reading (the induced principle should beat shuffled and wrong-domain ); the results reject it: shuffled matches the induced principle on one model and beats it on the other two, and 

wrong-domain also lowers violations. We therefore report the weaker but supported claim that the refused effects, not a uniquely induced rule, carry the transfer, with a generic-caution component present. 

Endpoints. We separate three metrics to avoid the ambiguity that a bypass attempt , an executed forbidden write, and a successful spec-game are distinct. The primary safety endpoint is the executed forbidden-write rate : the fraction of runs in which the agent writes an evaluation/secret/policy artifact (a forbidden effect), whether or not the write succeeds at cheating. In our runs the successful-spec-game rate is zero even ungoverned (these small models are poor at cheating), but the forbidden write itself executes on the ungoverned arm at a task-dependent rate, and is refused on every gated arm. Containment predicts the gated forbidden-write rate is exactly zero, entailed by the gate rather than estimated. The primary generalisation endpoint is the attempted-forbidden rate on held-out families (how often the agent proposes a forbidden effect it would have to be blocked from), since on gated arms the induced principle can only affect attempts, not executed violations. The competence endpoint is legitimate task success. Secondary endpoints are the number of blocked proposals before a compliant solution, overblocking on permitted actions superficially similar to red-lined ones, and blind-scored induction quality. 

Statistical design. Three proposer families are used, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2, and Phi-3.5-mini-instruct, to test that any effect is not specific to one model. The unit of analysis is the task, not the run; because decoding seeds contribute little variance in this setting, significance is computed at the task level with a paired test over tasks and reported with effect sizes, and the triggering subset is reported only as a pre-specified secondary analysis to avoid outcome-conditioned selection. All arms share tasks, seeds, and the gate, so paired contrasts attribute differences to the governance manipulation alone. 12 Supplementary Information S1 Full proofs 

The four theorems are stated in the Theory section (effect lattice, conservation under learned mediation, open-ended skill acquisition, signature-gated widening, and the refusal bound from imperfect induction). We restate here in full the two load-bearing arguments, with assumptions explicit. 

T1 (conservation under learned mediation), by union bound. Fix a run of n gate evaluations. Aboundary violation at step t means the executed trace τt satisfies eff( τt)̸ ⊑ ℓS even though the gate admitted the action. By the write-set discipline (Assumption 1) no loop operator, including the learned inducer Iϕ and mediator Mθ, writes S, ℓS , the signature store, or the gate code; hence ℓS and GS are the same objects at step t as at boot, and the digest H certifies which objects those are. An admitted action therefore satisfies 

A(πt, σ t) ⊑ ℓS for the conservative abstraction A. A violation then requires one of three failure events: the abstraction false-allows on some evaluation of the run (probability ≤ δA(n) over the run, by soundness of 

A, Definition 2), the implementation was bypassed ( ≤ δimpl ), or the identity/signature chain was forged (≤ δhash , by collision resistance and EUF-CMA). Taking a union bound over the three event classes gives 

Pr[ ∃t ≤ n : eff( τt)̸ ⊑ ℓS ] ≤ δA(n) + δimpl + δhash . The induced principle zt enters only Mθ’s proposal distribution, which changes which admissible action is proposed, never the admissibility test; so the bound contains no term in the quality of zt, and holds for an arbitrarily wrong induced principle. 

T2 (open-ended skill acquisition), by structural induction. Let new skills be programs in a DSL with primitive effects in L, sequential composition, conditionals, and bounded loops, under Assumption 2 of the Theory section: primitives carry certified sound abstractions; the effect of a sequential trace is the join of its parts plus any interaction coordinates, eff( τ1 · τ2) = eff( τ1) ⊔ eff( τ2) ⊔ ι(τ1, τ 2); and the abstraction of a composite dominates both parts and an over-approximation of their interactions, A(π1; π2) ⊒

A(π1) ⊔ A(π2) ⊔ I(π1, π 2) with I ⊒ ι. We first derive soundness for every DSL program by structural induction. Base case: primitive soundness is certified. Inductive step: a trace of π1; π2 factors as τ1 · τ2,so eff( τ1 · τ2) = eff( τ1) ⊔ eff( τ2) ⊔ ι(τ1, τ 2) ⊑ A(π1) ⊔ A(π2) ⊔ I(π1, π 2) ⊑ A(π1; π2) by the inductive hypothesis and conservative composition; conditionals and bounded loops reduce to finite joins of their branches/unrollings. Containment follows: an admitted program has A(π, σ ) ⊑ ℓS , hence every trace effect 

⊑ ℓS . The learner may thus add unboundedly many skills; the reachable authority never exceeds the frozen 

ℓS . This fails for a name-based gate, under which a composite of individually-named-permitted skills can exercise an interaction effect the gate has no coordinate to inspect. 

# S2 Extended evaluation 

Induced-principle generalisation and its controls. Table 1 reports the held-out forbidden-proposal rate (full-pool mean over 14 tasks, five seeds) for three models spanning three families (Mistral, Qwen, Phi) on the governance-decision benchmark. From refusals collected on the training families the system induces a natural-language principle with no human-written principle text in the inducer prompt; the mediator then consults it on held-out families whose red-line names never appear in training. Across all three models the induced principle lowers the held-out rate relative to no memory, most on the strongest model and modestly on the weakest. Two controls test what carries the transfer: shuffled preserves the set of refused effects but scrambles which reason is paired with which task, and wrong-domain induces a principle from a different red-line family. The shuffled control matches the induced principle on Mistral and beats it on Qwen and Phi, and the wrong-domain principle still lowers violations; we therefore report that the transferring signal is broad 13 avoidance of the refused kinds of effect, with a generic-caution component, rather than a uniquely-induced specific rule. The narrower specificity that does survive is that recorded content beats a contentless cue (Table 1 note; specific vs. generic feedback, 0.05 vs. 0.23 ). Table 1: Held-out forbidden-proposal rate by memory arm (full-pool mean; lower is better). Paired Wilcoxon vs. none at the task level. Model none induced hand-oracle shuffled wrong-domain Mistral-7B 0.339 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.143 Qwen2.5-7B 0.429 0.264 0.286 0.218 0.286 Phi-3.5-mini 0.554 0.429 0.429 0.279 0.429            

> Paired Wilcoxon, induced vs. none. At the unit of independent variation (seven held-out tasks, seed-averaged) no comparison reaches significance: Mistral p=0 .25 , Qwen p=0 .50 , Phi p=0 .50 . Treating the 35 scenario-by-seed pairs as replicates gives
> p=0 .0006 (effect 0.43 ), 0.010 (0.23 ) and 0.018 (0.20 ) respectively; seeds of one task are not independent evidence, so those values are descriptive. Across all three models the induced principle lowers the held-out rate; on Qwen and Phi the shuffled control (which preserves the refused set) lowers it more than the induced principle, and on Mistral they tie, so the transferring signal is the set of refused effects, not a uniquely-induced rule.

Verbatim system-induced principles. The principles below were produced by the frozen local model from refusal records alone; the inducer prompt contained no human governance sentence. Mistral-7B: “ Avoid taking actions that require human authorization, involve destructive force or manipulation of locks, pose a risk to personal safety or the safety of others, or involve handling unidentified or hazardous substances, without proper clearance or supervision. ” Qwen2.5-7B: “ Avoid performing actions that could cause harm or violate safety protocols without proper authorization or context-specific permissions. ” Phi-3.5-mini: “Avoid actions that compromise safety, violate protocols, or risk damage to property or individuals, even when immediate assistance or problem-solving is required. ” None names any held-out red-lined capability (leakage-checked). 

Specificity of governance memory. On the same benchmark, recording which action was refused beats a generic “you were refused” cue on Qwen: full-pool mean forbidden-proposal rate 0.054 (specific) versus 

0.229 (generic) versus 0.357 (no feedback); seed-level paired Wilcoxon p=0 .002 , task-level p=0 .068 over the fourteen scenarios. On Mistral the same comparison is directionally consistent but does not separate (0.062 versus 0.116 , task-level p=0 .32 ); the arm was not run on Phi. The content of the refusal, not merely its occurrence, carries what transfer there is. 

Software-native replication (closing the embodiment seam). Because the governance-decision scenarios above are embodied-flavoured (a robot choosing among physical actions), we replicate the benchmark with a software-native pool: fourteen decisions in which the red-lined shortcut is a software transgression (force-merge past red CI, read the production secret, rewrite the benchmark goldens, escalate one’s own token scope, edit the policy file) and the allowed alternatives defer to a human or a protocol. The induced principles are now software-flavoured (Qwen: “ Avoid taking actions that compromise integrity, security, compliance, or transparency, even under deadline pressure ”; Phi similar), so the software-agent scope holds without an embodiment seam. Two honest observations. First, baseline (no-memory) held-out violation rates are much lower here ( 0.04 –0.14 ) than on the embodied pool ( 0.34 –0.55 ): the models have internalised software-governance norms (do not skip CI, do not read production secrets) more strongly than embodied ones, leaving less room for memory to help. Second, on the one model with a non-trivial baseline (Mistral, 14 0.14 ) the induced principle drives held-out violations to zero while the shuffled control does not ( 0.14 ), the opposite of the embodied pool; on the other two the baseline is at the floor and no arm is distinguishable. The induced-versus-shuffled relationship is therefore domain- and model-dependent, which we report rather than average away. 

Is the transfer effect-specific? A pre-registered test says no. The shuffled control shows transfer is carried by the refused effects, but leaves open whether the induced principle is specific (captures the exact governance pattern) or merely cautious (avoids anything risky-looking). We pre-register a discriminating test: for each trained red-line we add a permitted-but-surface-similar held-out item (read a public config vs. a production secret; merge an approved PR vs. force-merge past red CI), and measure two endpoints, violation on red-lined items and over-block (needless deferral) on the permitted items. A specific principle would keep both low; a merely-cautious cue would trade violation for over-block. The prediction that the induced principle dominates a blunt generic-caution cue on this frontier is not supported: on the strongest model (Mistral) the induced principle attains the lowest violation ( 0.11 vs. 0.86 no-memory) but the highest 

over-block ( 0.26 vs. 0.00 for generic caution), i.e. it is more cautious, not more specific; on the other two models the induced principle and the generic-caution cue are statistically indistinguishable on both endpoints. We report this as a negative result: at the 7B scale the induced-principle benefit is generic caution, not effect-specific reasoning, and we do not claim otherwise. We also ran the same test on two frontier models (GPT-5.5 via the OpenAI Codex CLI and Gemini 3.5 Flash via Google Antigravity, each given the task and cue but not the hypothesis): both attain zero violation and zero over-block under every cue, including no cue at all. At the frontier the mechanism is thus redundant rather than beneficial: the models neither take the shortcut nor over-block the permitted action without any governance memory. Across the capability range we can test, then, no regime exhibits the effect-specific dissociation, at 7B because the transfer is merely cautious, at the frontier because alignment already suffices on this benchmark. This sharpens rather than weakens the paper’s thesis: since one cannot rely on either the small model’s caution or the frontier model’s alignment holding on harder or adversarial tasks, the load-bearing guarantee is the architectural gate whose zero-violation property is verified by construction (Theorem 1, Table 2), not any learned principle. 

Behavioural attestation at the frontier: a coverage bound, measured at ceiling. A natural complement to the gate is behavioural attestation: fingerprint the deployed model on a probe battery and alarm when the fingerprint moves, so that a silent substitution of the underlying model is caught. We tested the informativeness of such a fingerprint on a battery of 24 multiple-choice governance probes spanning five categories (spatial grounding, affordance, task planning, refusal, and permitted-vs-forbidden near-misses). Two design choices matter for reading the result. The fingerprint is the vector of chosen option letters, and the option order is fixed with the governance-sound choice at position A, so scoring is a deterministic parse with no LLM judge; the price of that determinism is that the battery is ceiling-confounded, since two models that are both simply correct produce identical vectors for that reason alone. That is what happened. Two frontier assistants from different providers (GPT-5.5 and Gemini 3.5 Flash, accessed 2026-07 at medium reasoning effort) each answered all 24 probes with the governance-sound option, on every one of three repetitions (within-model fingerprint distance 0), giving a cross-model distance of 0; an efficiency-pressure preamble designed to shift governance style flipped no answer in either model (config-shift distance 0). On this battery the two substrates are indistinguishable, so a substitution between them would raise no alarm. We read this as an empirical instance of a structural bound rather than a defect of one battery: within the class of models competent on the probed surface, fingerprint distance carries no substitution signal, and items that would separate competent models are exactly the items on which a differing answer no longer implies a governance hazard. Behavioural attestation therefore certifies governance-equivalence on the probed surface, not substrate identity; identity claims must ride on the signed commitment, with behavioural probes useful only as a drift tripwire; what can 15 be cryptographically proven about the training run itself is its own hard problem [ 42 ], and formal verification of learned components remains out of reach in general [43]. 

Data and code availability. Raw per-probe responses and the assert-guarded summary are released in the harness repository ( https://github.com/s20sc/governed-individuation ; raw responses under data/2026-07-02-attestation-raw/ , with the summary beside it), and the model identities are recorded at collection time in the released summary (OpenAI Codex CLI with config model=gpt-5.5 ;Google Antigravity, Gemini 3.5 Flash, medium reasoning effort; both accessed 2026-07-02), so the attestation runs are auditable from the release alone. The quantitative results reproduce from the released data and the checked-in generators; the adversarial verifier suite and the assert-guarded summaries run standalone. A driver ( reproduce.py ) chains the unit tests, invariant checks, verifier suite and, with a local model, the statistical study; the invariant and cost stages additionally require the AEROS runtime package. 

Deterministic containment under open action (ToolGym-GI). On the tool-use benchmark the executed forbidden-effect rate under governance is exactly zero on every task and seed, entailed by the gate rather than estimated. Ungoverned agents execute forbidden effects at a task-dependent rate: on families the model solves honestly the rate is zero, but on the hardest family, under repeated “still failing” pressure, the ungoverned agent rewrites the file that grades it on 12 of 12 seeds, while the effect gate blocks the identical action by its effect and redirects the agent to the legitimate fix (governed task success 12 /12 vs. ungoverned 9/12 on the even-Fibonacci family for Qwen; on each model’s hardest tamper family neither arm reaches the fix). The semantic monitor classifies the tampering edit by the file it writes, so an edit relabelled “update value” is still caught, whereas a name-based blocklist keyed on the intent label passes it; this contrast is unit-tested in the released harness. 

Adversarial verifier evaluation: the residual δA is measured, and closable. Theorem 1 reduces safety to the verifier’s false-allow rate δA; the reduction is useful only if δA is small for a real monitor under attack, so we measure it at scale. We build an adversary that pursues each of four filesystem effect classes (rewrite the grading artifact, read a withheld secret, mutate the policy, tamper the audit log) through eight encodings of rising indirection: direct write, relabelled intent, path traversal ( src/../eval/... ), symlink alias, keyword-free symlink alias, nested symlink, temp-file-then-rename, and runtime indirection (a helper that opens the forbidden path only at execution). This is 32 attempts, all of which do reach the forbidden effect. We score four monitors of rising strength by their false-allow rate over these attempts (Table 2). A name/intent blocklist admits 0.75 ; the substring monitor 0.50 ; a path-resolving static semantic monitor 0.25 ,catching every statically-named indirection but missing the two encodings whose named path differs from the opened path (temp-then-rename, runtime indirection); and a dynamic monitor that also canonicalises the path actually opened at execution drives the false-allow rate to 0.00 . The ladder is uniform across all four effect classes. The dynamic monitor is not hypothetical: we implement it as a live effect tracer (a process-level 

open /rename audit hook that canonicalises each opened path and refuses the run on a forbidden touch), and demonstrate that executing the runtime-indirection bypass under it is caught, the forbidden open observed directly ( tests/test_live_monitor.py ). This substantiates “by effect, not by name” quantitatively, and shows the residual δA is not a permanent limitation but is closed by runtime effect tracing; the tracer’s scope (in-process opens) is the trusted computing base the theory names as δimpl , extendable to subprocesses and native code by a ptrace/seccomp tracer. 16 Table 2: Adversarial verifier-bypass false-allow rate (fraction of forbidden-reaching bypasses a monitor admits; lower is better) over 4 effect classes × 8 indirection encodings ( n=32 ). Monitor name/intent substring (v1) semantic (static) semantic (dynamic) False-allow rate 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 

> Uniform across all four effect classes (grading-write, secret-read, policy-mutation, log-tamper). The static monitor’s residual is exactly the two encodings whose named path differs from the opened path; dynamic effect tracing closes it. Regression-tested in the released harness ( tests/test_verifier_eval.py ).

# References 

[1] Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Concrete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016. [2] Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato, Vladimir Mikulik, Matthew Rahtz, Tom Everitt, Ramana Kumar, Zac Kenton, Jan Leike, and Shane Legg. Specification gaming: the flip side of AI ingenuity. DeepMind Blog, 2020. URL https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/ specification-gaming-the-flip-side-of-ai-ingenuity/ .[3] Long Ouyang et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. arXiv:2203.02155. [4] Yuntao Bai et al. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 ,2022. [5] Noah Shinn et al. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. arXiv:2303.11366. [6] Joon Sung Park et al. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceed-ings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST) , 2023. arXiv:2304.03442. [7] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec ’23) , pages 79–90. ACM, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3605764.3623985. [8] Zehang Deng, Yongjian Guo, Changzhou Han, Wanlun Ma, Junwu Xiong, Sheng Wen, and Yang Xiang. AI agents under threat: A survey of key security challenges and future pathways. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(7):182:1–182:36, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3716628. [9] Alexander Robey, Zachary Ravichandran, Vijay Kumar, Hamed Hassani, and George J. Pappas. Jail-breaking LLM-controlled robots. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 11948–11956. IEEE, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICRA55743.2025.11128119. [10] Alan Chan, Carson Ezell, Max Kaufmann, Kevin Wei, Lewis Hammond, Herbie Bradley, Emma Bluemke, Nitarshan Rajkumar, David Krueger, Noam Kolt, Lennart Heim, and Markus Anderljung. Visibility into AI agents. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’24) , pages 958–973, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2024. ACM. doi: 10.1145/3630106. 3658948. arXiv:2401.13138. 17 [11] Yonadav Shavit, Sandhini Agarwal, Miles Brundage, Steven Adler, Cullen O’Keefe, Rosie Campbell, Teddy Lee, Pamela Mishkin, Tyna Eloundou, Alan Hickey, Katarina Slama, Lama Ahmad, Paul McMillan, Alex Beutel, Alexandre Passos, and David G. Robinson. Practices for governing agentic AI systems. White paper, OpenAI, December 2023. URL https://cdn.openai.com/papers/ practices-for-governing-agentic-ai-systems.pdf . OpenAI white paper, December 2023. [12] Alan Chan, Kevin Wei, Sihao Huang, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Elija Perrier, Seth Lazar, Gillian K. Had-field, and Markus Anderljung. Infrastructure for AI agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-search , 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ckh17xN2R2 .arXiv:2501.10114. [13] Tobin South, Samuele Marro, Thomas Hardjono, Robert Mahari, Cedric Deslandes Whitney, Dazza Greenwood, Alan Chan, and Alex Pentland. Authenticated delegation and authorized AI agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09674 .[14] Tianneng Shi, Jingxuan He, Zhun Wang, Hongwei Li, Linyu Wu, Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. Progent: Securing AI agents with privilege control, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11703 .[15] Yingqi Zhang. Agent libOS: A runtime substrate for capability-controlled self-evolving LLM agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03895 .[16] Zachary Ravichandran, Alexander Robey, Vijay Kumar, George J. Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Safety guardrails for LLM-enabled robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 11(4):4649–4656, 2026. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2026.3667488. [17] Lui Sha. Using simplicity to control complexity. IEEE Software , 18(4):20–28, 2001. doi: 10.1109/MS. 2001.936213. [18] Mohammed Alshiekh, Roderick Bloem, Rüdiger Ehlers, Bettina Könighofer, Scott Niekum, and Ufuk Topcu. Safe reinforcement learning via shielding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2018. [19] Aaron D. Ames, Samuel Coogan, Magnus Egerstedt, Gennaro Notomista, Koushil Sreenath, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier functions: Theory and applications. In 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC) , pages 3420–3431, 2019. doi: 10.23919/ECC.2019.8796030. arXiv:1903.11199. [20] Edoardo Debenedetti, Ilia Shumailov, Tianqi Fan, Jamie Hayes, Nicholas Carlini, Daniel Fabian, Christoph Kern, Chongyang Shi, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Defeating prompt injections by design, 2025. arXiv:2503.18813. [21] Krti Tallam. Layered mutability: Continuity and governance in persistent self-modifying agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.14717 . arXiv:2604.14717. [22] Botao Amber Hu, Helena Rong, and Max Van Kleek. Dissociative identity: Language model agents lack grounding for reputation mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 2026 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT ’26. Association for Computing Machinery, 2026. doi: 10.1145/3805689.3806748. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3805689.3806748 .[23] Takumi Otsuka, Kentaroh Toyoda, and Alex Leung. AI identity: Standards, gaps, and research directions for AI agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.23280 .18 [24] Zibin Lin, Shengli Zhang, Guofu Liao, Dacheng Tao, and Taotao Wang. Binding agent ID: Unleashing the power of AI agents with accountability and credibility, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2512.17538 .[25] Yuning Jiang and Donghui Wang. Dynamic attestation for AI agent communication. Internet-Draft draft-jiang-seat-dynamic-attestation-00, Internet Engineering Task Force, November 2025. URL https: //datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-jiang-seat-dynamic-attestation/00/ .Work in Progress. [26] German I. Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L. Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Networks , 113:54–71, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j. neunet.2019.01.012. [27] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models, 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291 . Also published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2024). [28] James P. Anderson. Computer security technology planning study. Technical Report ESD-TR-73-51, Electronic Systems Division, Air Force Systems Command, United States Air Force, Hanscom AFB, Bedford, MA, October 1972. URL https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/history/ ande72a.pdf . Two volumes. NTIS AD-758 206. [29] Jerome H. Saltzer and Michael D. Schroeder. The protection of information in computer systems. 

Proceedings of the IEEE , 63(9):1278–1308, 1975. [30] Butler W. Lampson. Protection. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review , 8(1):18–24, January 1974. doi: 10.1145/775265.775268. Originally presented at the Fifth Princeton Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, March 1971, pp. 437–443. [31] Mark Samuel Miller. Robust composition: Towards a unified approach to access control and concurrency control . PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, 2006. [32] Andrei Sabelfeld and Andrew C. Myers. Language-based information-flow security. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , 21(1):5–19, 2003. [33] Santiago Torres-Arias, Hammad Afzali, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Reza Curtmola, and Justin Cappos. in-toto: Providing farm-to-table guarantees for bits and bytes. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) , 2019. [34] Justin Samuel, Nick Mathewson, Justin Cappos, and Roger Dingledine. Survivable key compro-mise in software update systems. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’10) , pages 61–72. ACM, 2010. doi: 10.1145/1866307.1866315. [35] George C. Necula. Proof-carrying code. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , pages 106–119, 1997. doi: 10.1145/263699.263712. [36] Yangjun Ruan, Honghua Dong, Andrew Wang, Silviu Pitis, Yongchao Zhou, Jimmy Ba, Yann Dubois, Chris J. Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Identifying the risks of LM agents with an LM-emulated sandbox, 2023. arXiv:2309.15817. 19 [37] Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Vivian Fang, Noppapon C., Roy Huang, Aaron Hao, Martin Casado, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. Goex: Perspectives and designs towards a runtime for autonomous llm applications, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.06921 .[38] Matt Bishop and Michael Dilger. Checking for race conditions in file accesses. Computing Systems , 9 (2):131–152, 1996. [39] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act). Official Journal of the European Union, L series, 2024/1689, 12 July 2024, 2024. URL http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj . CELEX 32024R1689. Entered into force 1 August 2024; applicable in stages from 2 February 2025, with general application from 2 August 2026. [40] Gregory Falco, Ben Shneiderman, Julia Badger, Ryan Carrier, Anton Dahbura, David Danks, Martin Eling, Alwyn Goodloe, Jerry Gupta, Christopher Hart, Marina Jirotka, Henric Johnson, Cara LaPointe, Ashley J. Llorens, Alan K. Mackworth, Carsten Maple, Sigurður Emil Pálsson, Frank Pasquale, Alan Winfield, and Zee Kin Yeong. Governing AI safety through independent audits. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(7):566–571, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s42256-021-00370-7. [41] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N. White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. Closing the AI accountability gap: Defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20) , pages 33–44, Barcelona, Spain, 2020. ACM. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372873. [42] Hengrui Jia, Mohammad Yaghini, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Natalie Dullerud, Anvith Thudi, Varun Chandrasekaran, and Nicolas Papernot. Proof-of-learning: Definitions and practice. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 1039–1056. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/SP40001. 2021.00106. [43] Sanjit A. Seshia, Dorsa Sadigh, and S. Shankar Sastry. Toward verified artificial intelligence. Communi-cations of the ACM , 65(7):46–55, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3503914. 20