Title: DPAgent-in-the-Middle: Agentic Defense and Repair Against AI-Groomed Deceptive Patterns

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06914v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 00:29:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# DPAgent -in-the-Middle: Agentic Defense and Repair Against AI-Groomed Deceptive Patterns 

Zewei Shi ∗† , Ruoxi Sun †, Haoyang Li ‡, Seong Oun Hwang §,Feng Liu ∗, Minhui Xue †, and Xingliang Yuan ∗∗The University of Melbourne, Australia 

†CSIRO, Australia 

‡Macquarie University, Australia 

§Gachon University, South Korea 

Abstract —Privacy deceptive patterns in web interfaces sys-tematically manipulate users into disclosing personal data, yet existing defenses are fragmented, static, and increasingly vulner-able to manipulation by large language models. Moreover, data voids, areas of information scarcity within the web ecosystem, create fertile ground for adversaries to inject misleading con-tent that can be scraped and learned by AI systems, thereby amplifying both deceptive design and model misbehavior. In this paper, we formalize a new threat model, AI grooming, where attackers exploit data voids to seed benign-looking but malicious samples that corrupt model reasoning and normalize deceptive practices. To address this threat in privacy deceptive patterns, we present DPAgent , an agentic and reasoning-aware framework that orchestrates four specialized agents to mitigate the AI Grooming threat via a proactive defense that combines latent space purification with defensive prompting and operates directly in live web environments to proactively explore, detect, and repair privacy deceptive user interfaces before they reach end users. Extensive evaluations show that DPAgent detects 90.98% of groomed samples, achieves state-of-the-art privacy deceptive pattern detection with a micro F1 of 0.816, explores over 80% of pattern types while visiting only about 10% of the pages required by baselines, and successfully repairs 77% of detected deceptive interfaces. A large-scale study of 485 websites in the wild reveals that up to 98% contain at least one privacy deceptive pattern, over 90% of which can be mitigated by DPAgent . User studies further confirm that DPAgent effectively reduces privacy risks while preserving browsing experience. Our results demonstrate the promise of agent-in-the-middle defenses for securing the web UI supply chain against deceptive design and emerging AI threats rooted in data void exploitation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The modern web ecosystem is increasingly mediated by complex interactions among users, interfaces, search engines, and artificial intelligence systems. These interactions promise efficiency and personalization, yet they also reshape how information is produced, ranked, and consumed. Privacy risks in this setting no longer arise only from explicit data collection or technical breaches. Instead, they often emerge from the automated pipelines that decide what content is retrieved, how it is presented, and which actions are nudged by interface de-sign. As a result, privacy risk is no longer confined to isolated interfaces, but is distributed across the broader information and interface supply chain. A growing body of research has identified data voids as a structural vulnerability in this ecosystem [1]. Data voids arise when user queries correspond to topics for which little authoritative or high-quality content exists. This can occur for emerging events, niche concepts, ambiguous terms, or newly coined phrases. Search engines and AI retrieval systems implicitly assume that relevant and trustworthy information is available for any query. When this assumption fails, ranking becomes unreliable and low-quality or strategically crafted content is more likely to dominate. Recent work shows that adversaries actively exploit such voids by injecting misleading or fabricated content into underpopulated query spaces, a practice increasingly referred to as AI grooming [2], [3], [4]. A prominent example involves state-aligned disinformation networks operating hundreds of affiliated websites designed to launder and amplify geopolitical propaganda at scale. Rather than persuading human readers, these networks flood web crawlers with coordinated narratives so that retrieval systems and large language models ingest and reproduce them. By flooding data voids with targeted narratives, attackers can steer what retrieval systems collect and what language models reproduce, even without convincing users directly [4], [5], [6], [7]. In parallel, the same voids can be exploited to route users toward attacker-controlled sites through search and recommendation systems [8], [1]. In both cases, information scarcity becomes a lever for steering either models or users, thereby tightly coupling AI grooming with downstream pri-vacy deceptive patterns (PDPs) on the web. Deceptive patterns (DPs), also known as dark patterns [9], form another critical piece of this landscape. They are inten-tional interface design strategies that exploit cognitive biases to steer users toward choices they might not otherwise make, such as oversharing data, accepting tracking, or consenting by default [10], [11]. DPs have become a central topic in human-computer interaction and privacy research, with extensive taxonomies and empirical studies documenting practices such as obstruction, forced action, sneaking, and nagging [12], [13]. While prior work has examined DPs at the level of individual interfaces, we argue that data voids introduce a new and powerful attack surface that can amplify the reach and the impact of DPs across the web supply chain. Specifically, in this study, we identify two complementary ways in which data voids can be leveraged to inject and amplify DPs (as shown in Figure 1). First, through AI grooming. Beyond grooming with 

> arXiv:2606.06914v1 [cs.CR] 5 Jun 2026

fake news or misleading narratives, attackers can deliberately create web content embedded with DP strategies, such as manipulative consent dialogs or misleading privacy claims, and target data void queries to increase the likelihood that such content is collected by automated crawlers and AI-based data pipelines. Over time, this content can influence model training or retrieval, leading to AI systems ( e.g., code models) that reproduce or even generate DP interfaces by default. Second, through user redirection. Attackers can construct websites that heavily employ DPs and then associate them with void queries. When users search for these queries, search engines or AI assistants may direct them to these sites precisely because few alternatives exist. In this way, data voids act as upstream enablers that convert information scarcity into concrete privacy harm by funneling users toward manipulative interfaces at scale. Recent reports indicate that grooming-style manipulations are already occurring in practice. Cybersecurity Dive notes that CISOs increasingly prioritize risks where adversaries flood data pipelines to distort model behavior [14]. CBS News reported cases of AI-assisted interface deception using deepfake videos impersonating doctors to spread false medical advice [15]. The Internet Watch Foundation identified over 3,500 AI-generated CSAM items within a 30-day period [16]. The Institute for Strategic Dialogue further showed that mainstream LLMs are vulnerable to coordinated grooming campaigns, while NewsGuard documented a state-sponsored disinformation network exploiting low-competition informa-tion spaces to manipulate Western AI systems [2]. Reports indicate that millions of such articles generated in 2024 have already misled major AI systems into propagating provably false narratives [5], [6]. Similar bot-driven and AI-generated campaigns on social platforms further fabricate signals of relevance that shape what algorithms surface and models learn [4], [7]. An audit by the Open Source Foundation found that LLMs reproduce state-backed disinformation narratives even under benign prompts [17], highlighting how adversaries exploit data voids [1] and iterative querying to steer model outputs. Complementary analyses similarly confirm that LLMs may amplify such sources in low-resource settings due to alignment gaps [6], [18]. Together, these incidents demonstrate that AI grooming is no longer hypothetical but an emerging and already evidenced security threat, one that is tightly coupled with information scarcity in the open web. Data voids themselves are difficult, and in many cases impossible, to eliminate. No retrieval system or model can fully cover the long tail of evolving concepts on the open web. New terms constantly emerge, and rare queries will always outpace content creation. Rather than attempting to remove data voids, this work focuses on mitigating their most harmful consequences. We argue that effective defenses should target the mechanisms that exploit voids , namely AI grooming and the deployment of DPs. This calls for protections that operate across the interface supply chain, from AI-mediated retrieval and generation to the point where users interact with live web interfaces. Building on this perspective, we propose a system-level framework to detect and mitigate privacy deceptive patterns (PDPs) under adversarial conditions shaped by data voids. Specifically, PDPs are an enhanced taxonomy that selects privacy-critical DPs and extends them with use-case descriptions and targeted repair methods (see Appendix A). Our approach treats the user interface as the final and most influential control point in the web ecosystem, while explicitly accounting for how upstream manipulation can bias both content and models. We focus on three core challenges. First, DPs are diverse, contextual, and often subtle, which makes rule-based detection brittle and incomplete. Second, meaningful analysis requires exploring complex, nonlinear in-teraction paths that only emerge through realistic user behavior over time. Third, emerging threats such as AI grooming are adaptive, allowing attackers to evolve content and interfaces in response to automated defenses. To address these challenges, we design an agents-in-the-middle framework that combines multi-modal perception, automated task generation, structured reasoning grounded in a DP taxonomy, and real-time interface intervention. A dedicated grooming purification component further protects the system by filtering and neutralizing ma-nipulated signals before they propagate through detection and repair pipelines. Based on this design, we introduce DPAgent , a multi-agent framework that operates directly within live web environments to identify and repair PDPs at scale. DPAgent coordinates four specialized agents for grooming purification, task genera-tion and exploration, deceptive pattern detection, and interface repairing. By linking regulatory and expert knowledge to executable reasoning rules, the framework moves beyond ad hoc checks toward systematic and adaptive privacy protection. Rather than stopping at detection, DPAgent intervenes before rendering to rewrite or restructure deceptive elements, mitigat-ing harm at the moment of user interaction. 

Contributions. Our contributions are fourfold:  

> •

We reveal a new attack surface that connects data void exploitation with DPs, showing how information scarcity can amplify both AI grooming and manipulative interface practices across the web supply chain.  

> •

We formalize AI grooming in the context of privacy decep-tive patterns (PDPs) and propose a proactive defense com-bines latent space purification with prompt-level filtering.  

> •

We design and implement DPAgent , an agent-in-the-middle framework for AI grooming purification and PDP detection and repair, that integrates automated task gener-ation, interface exploration, structured reasoning, and real-time interface intervention within live web environments.  

> •

We conduct comprehensive evaluations and real-world stud-ies on diverse web applications, demonstrating DPAgent ’s effectiveness and robustness in mitigating PDPs under ad-versarial conditions. II. AI G ROOMING 

AI grooming attacks are fundamentally distinct from back-door, jailbreak, and adversarial attacks in both intent and 2Vulnerable web supply chain Mitigation provided by DPAgent 

> Groomed AI Model
> Search Engine
> Attacker
> AI-generated Websites
> DPAgent
> End-users
> Websites Return to End-users
> Web Developers Grooming Samples
> Exploits data voids to increase the likelihood to be collected by AI Creates grooming samples Groomed AI generates DP DPAgent protects AI models from grooming
> Creates websites with DP
> Exploits data voids to associate DP websites with void queries
> Websites with DP
> Return DP websites Websites repaired by DPAgent
> DPAgent Attacker
> Privacy Deceptions in Web Supply Chain AI Grooming in Web Supply Chain Mitigation by DPAgent
> DPAgent purifies grooming samples before it poisoning AI model training
> Mitigation by DPAgent
> DPAgent detects DPs in websites and repair them dynamically, providing systematic and adaptive privacy protection

Fig. 1: An overview of DPAgent . DPAgent reframes web privacy issue mitigation as a supply chain optimization, providing an effective defensive strategy against AI grooming and privacy deceptive patterns. execution. Backdoor attacks [19] embed hidden triggers dur-ing training to elicit incorrect behavior only when specific conditions are met. Jailbreak attacks [20] aim to circumvent safety mechanisms to extract restricted content. Adversarial attacks [21] craft malicious inputs at inference time to induce immediate misclassification. In contrast, AI grooming does not rely on explicit triggers or targeted prompts to exploit a model in real-time. Instead, it is a manipulation tactic that strategically seeds the learning environment to shape the data supply chain itself. Furthermore, AI grooming is funda-mentally distinct from traditional data poisoning [22]. While sophisticated poisoning attacks ( e.g., clean-label poisoning) also utilize superficially benign data, they ultimately rely on imperceptible statistical noise or hidden feature-level triggers. In contrast, grooming achieves stealth entirely through se-mantic deception. It injects logically coherent samples whose narratives appear completely harmless to human reviewers, yet inherently conceal ground-truth malicious intent. Because it lacks the structural artifacts typical of poisoned data, grooming represents a more insidious threat: its narrative coherence effortlessly bypasses human-in-the-loop filtering, while its absence of statistical anomalies allows it to seamlessly evade standard automated data quality audits. Crucially, as discussed in Section I, such attacks are nat-urally amplified by data voids : underrepresented or low-competition query spaces. In these voids, attacker-generated content is more likely to dominate crawling, indexing, and downstream model ingestion. This shift in focus, from ma-nipulating immediate model outputs to corrupting the data substrate, introduces a new attack vector that directly connects data void exploitation with the automated proliferation of Privacy Deceptive Patterns (PDPs). 

Threat Model. We address a threat landscape where at-tackers exploit data voids to inject manipulated content. We distinguish between two interconnected vectors: User-Facing Grooming (the generation of deceptive artifacts) and Supply-Chain Grooming (the propagation of these artifacts). 

(i) User-Facing Grooming (The Deceptive Generation Threat). In this scenario, an LLM is manipulated to generate UI content that appears statistically and visually benign to human users yet is malicious in its ground truth. Examples include embedding hidden trackers, invisible text, or manip-ulative consent logic that humans execute without suspicion. Unlike traditional adversarial evasion or adversarial examples which typically rely on imperceptible noise to fool a classifier while preserving the original semantics, User-Facing Groom-ing exploits the semantic gap between human perception and machine execution. The generated content is designed to be accepted by humans as safe, thereby bypassing human-in-the-loop verification, while carrying a payload (the PDP) that executes the attacker’s intent. 

(ii) Supply-Chain Grooming (The Poisoning Threat). The adversary aims to influence future model behaviors by inject-ing these human-benign but ground-truth malicious samples into data voids. Because these samples are indistinguishable from high-quality data to standard filters, they are preferen-tially collected by crawlers. This results in the poisoning of training-time datasets for future foundation models. The goal is to make future models normalize or reproduce these deceptive patterns by default. 

Defense Scope via Sub-Agent Training. Our defense, 

DPAgent , bridges the gap between these two vectors through the specialized training of its sub-agents. While DPAgent 

acts as a client-side proxy during inference time, its core capability stems from the Grooming Purifying Agent . By training this sub-agent to discern the specific discrepancies between generated benign-looking artifacts and authentic con-tent, DPAgent solves the supply-chain grooming problem at the point of contact. It effectively acts as a filter that identifies and neutralizes groomed samples before they can mislead 3the downstream PDP Detection Agent or harm the end-user. Consequently, our framework defends against the immediate threat of deceptive UIs at inference time while demonstrating the necessary capability to sanitize the data supply chain at training time. 

Attacks considered in this study. To operationalize the proposed threat model and evaluate DPAgent ’s defense capa-bilities, we simulate two concrete attack scenarios that reflect increasing realism. The first is a naive baseline representing a basic form of generative AI grooming. In this scenario, a benign prompt is used to generate an entire webpage from scratch. This single generated page targets two attack vectors simultaneously: it acts as user-facing grooming by presenting misleading UI content (such as manipulative privacy dialogs) to deceive human users, while also serving as supply-chain grooming by masquerading as a benign-looking webpage to evade auto-mated crawlers and poison AI training datasets. However, this whole-page generation approach faces practical challenges. It is difficult to maintain authenticity at scale, and search engines can easily detect these pages due to AI-generated stylistic artifacts or a lack of real user engagement signals (such as real traffic and clicks). To model the more sophisticated semantic gap threat defined in our threat model, we introduce a second, targeted groom-ing strategy . Instead of generating full pages, this strategy modifies only small, high-risk regions within existing real webpages, termed privacy deceptive zones , such as cookie banners and ad frames. These elements are chosen because they directly implement PDPs and are frequent targets for data collection pipelines. By embedding subtle manipulations into these zones, attackers can exploit the credibility of legitimate sites while effectively executing inference-time evasion. We define five specific manipulation strategies designed to widen the gap between human perception and machine execution:  

> •

Adding Noise: injecting random noise into vulnerable re-gions to disrupt automated analysis while remaining visually negligible.  

> •

Pixel Modification: randomly altering selected pixels to arbitrary values to degrade model feature extraction.  

> •

Invisible Text: inserting induced text ( e.g., ads, sponsor-ships, or policy statements) rendered in the same color as the background, visible only to the Document Object Model (DOM) parser.  

> •

Alpha Channel [23]: embedding induced text into the alpha channel of images, invisible to humans but readable by AI models.  

> •

Unreadable Text: replacing readable text with visually distorted but machine-readable content. These techniques strictly preserve the visual appearance for human users (maintaining the “benign” facade) while injecting hidden signals into the data stream consumed by AI models. When combined with data void exploitation, such manipula-tions can be preferentially collected and learned, increasing the likelihood that future models reproduce or normalize PDPs in generated or mediated interfaces. III. DPA G E N T : E XPLORATION , D ETECTION & R EPAIR 

In this section, we present DPAgent , a multi-agent frame-work designed to dynamically explore websites, detect PDPs, and automatically repair user interfaces before real users encounter them. DPAgent comprises four specialized agents: the Grooming Purifying Agent, the Task Generation Agent, the PDP Detection Agent, and the Interface Repairing Agent. Figure 2 provides an overview of the framework. 

A. Overall Workflow 

DPAgent requires users to deploy a local proxy ( e.g., 

MITMProxy [24]) to mediate HTTP(S) traffic and access webpage source code and responses rendered in the browser. When the user’s device is inactive ( e.g., indicated by low CPU/GPU utilization or low energy consumption over a period of time) and with user’s permission, DPAgent prioritizes a queue of websites based on visit frequency in the browsing history. It then performs backend memory updates by au-tonomously exploring these sites, detecting PDPs, repairing interfaces, and storing the repaired code. When the user becomes active and resumes browsing, the proxy compares incoming requests against cached records to reduce runtime overhead and minimize both user experience disruption and performance impact. Additionally, users can configure the validity period of cached memory entries, allowing them to balance inference cost against browsing freshness. In practice, the workflow begins when a user navigates to a URL in the browser. Once the response is intercepted by the proxy, the request URL is first matched against the memory cache. If a match is found, the stored, repaired response is returned and rendered directly. Otherwise, the response and a current screenshot of the webpage are forwarded to the Grooming Purifying Agent. Acting as the first line of defense, this agent identifies and filters potential AI grooming signals to ensure that downstream agents receive purified inputs. If the page passes this purification stage, the Task Generation Agent takes over. It constructs structured exploration plans using a large language model guided by reinforcement-learning-based prompt optimization, enabling efficient and goal-directed nav-igation of website elements. Based on the generated task list and collected interaction traces, the PDP Detection Agent analyzes the interface. This agent combines human expert knowledge with LLM reasoning to formalize definitions of PDPs and applies reasoning-augmented analysis to extracted UI content to identify privacy-threatening behaviors. When a PDP is detected, the Interface Repairing Agent is invoked. This agent intercepts network traffic via the proxy, employs a secondary reasoning model to infer the precise locations of deceptive elements, and applies predefined, webpage-safe repair actions to modify the interface. Finally, the repaired webpage, including cookies and page source, is cached and served to users on subsequent visits. We describe each agent in detail in the following subsections. 4CLIP         

> Google Search Engine
> Website Automation Model Summary of Website
> Website Screenshots
> PDP Definitions
> Detected PDP
> Multi-modal Detection Agent
> Interface Repairing Agent
> Privacy Deceptive Pattern (PDP) Detection Agent Task Generation Agent Web User Grooming Purifying Agent
> Web User Web Browser MITM Proxy Memory Grooming Filter in Latent Space Verified with Pearson Correlation Task List Samples Experts Visit Websites Repaired Webpage URL + Webpage Snapshot
> Repairing Approaches:
> Warning Highlighting important links Blocking content Auto cookie setting User interface cleaning
> Defensive Prompts
> Multi-Agent RL-based Task Generation
> Initial Prompt I0
> Reward Function
> Iterated Prompt Icand
> LLM
> If not found in the memory Send the new Webpage

Fig. 2: An overview of the DPAgent framework. 

B. Grooming Purifying Agent 

To safeguard the DPAgent pipeline against grooming at-tacks, we introduce the Grooming Purifying Agent, which comprises two complementary defense components: (i) agrooming filter deployed at the input stage to collaborate with the proxy and block suspicious grooming content, and (ii) 

a carefully designed defensive prompt applied in the PDP Detection Agent (§III-D) to further prevent grooming sam-ples from misleading downstream reasoning. These defenses leverage both discriminative learning and the reasoning and generalization capabilities of LLMs to identify and block subtly crafted malicious inputs. 

Grooming filter. Standard pre-processing defenses ( e.g., de-noising or pixel-level comparison) may mitigate basic pertur-bations such as noise generation or pixel modification, but fundamentally fail against invisible text and alpha-channel attacks. In these cases, pixel-level inspection reveals no visible differences; the discrepancy emerges only when the model loads the image into memory and reads metadata or alpha channels. This motivates our approach of fine-tuning a model to perform provenance classification at the representation level rather than relying on surface-level filtering. In our design, the grooming filter is a supervised classifier fine-tuned from pre-trained vision or multimodal backbones, including con-volutional networks and multimodal transformers. We attach an additional projection layer to classify each input as either 

generated or original , and perform backpropagation to update the parameters. We also evaluated several commercial MLLMs for generated-content detection and selected the model with the highest F1 score as our filter (see Appendix Figure IX). To explain why the grooming filter performs well in iden-tifying grooming attacks, we hypothesize that fine-tuning en-ables the model to learn subtle discriminative features embed-ded in adversarial manipulations, particularly those designed to conceal DPs [25]. Although often imperceptible to humans, such features can form detectable signatures in representa-tion space [26]. Trained on a diverse dataset of original and groomed samples, the filter becomes adept at capturing nuanced cues that distinguish synthetic manipulations from authentic web interfaces [27], [28]. To empirically test this hypothesis, we compare the grooming filter with CLIP [29], a widely used general-purpose encoder, by analyzing how both models respond to grooming perturbations. Let I(i) 

> o

denote the i-th original image and I(i) 

> g

its groomed counterpart. Let FGF denote the embedding function of our fine-tuned grooming filter, instantiated as an EfficientNet [30] feature extractor, and let FCLIP denote that of a pre-trained CLIP encoder. For a dataset of N image pairs, we define the feature-space distances: 

DGF =

n

∥FGF (I(i) 

> o

) − FGF (I(i) 

> g

)∥2

oNi=1 

,DCLIP =

n

∥FCLIP (I(i) 

> o

) − FCLIP (I(i) 

> g

)∥2

oNi=1 

.

We compute the Pearson correlation between these two distance vectors: 

ρ(DGF , D CLIP ) = Cov (DGF , D CLIP )

σDGF · σDCLIP 

.

A high positive correlation ( e.g., ρ ≥ 0.7) implies that the grooming filter and CLIP encoder respond similarly to grooming-induced perturbations, i.e., 

∀i, ∥FGF (I(i) 

> o

) − FGF (I(i) 

> g

)∥2 ∝ ∥ FCLIP (I(i) 

> o

) − FCLIP (I(i) 

> g

)∥2.

Since CLIP is trained to encode high-level semantic fea-tures [29], strong agreement with our grooming filter indicates that the grooming filter also captures semantically meaningful, task-relevant signals rather than overfitting to superficial arti-facts. Thus, the correlation ρ(DGF , D CLIP ) provides statistical evidence that the filter learns generalizable representations indicative of grooming manipulations. As shown in Table III, 5this alignment is consistently strong across different groom-ing strategies, validating the robustness and relevance of the learned representation for grooming detection. Given CLIP’s strong performance as a general-purpose visual encoder, it is natural to consider using it directly for grooming detection. To test this baseline, we append a binary classification head [31], [28] to the CLIP image encoder, consisting of a linear projection, batch normalization, ReLU activation, dropout, and a final classification layer. However, as shown in Table III, our fine-tuned grooming filter significantly outperforms this CLIP-based classifier, demonstrating the ad-vantage of task-specific fine-tuning for capturing nuanced grooming signals. 

Defensive prompts. Because the Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) used in DPAgent may be commercial black-box models that cannot be fine-tuned, we further introduce a prompt-based grooming defense. We design a carefully crafted instruction (see Appendix B-C) that explicitly alerts the model to potential grooming scenarios and constrains its behavior during PDP detection. Concretely, the prompt presents both original and generated examples and instructs the model to reason about subtle manipulations and to prioritize privacy-harm detection under adversarial settings. If the model has already been partially compromised, its outputs may reflect grooming-induced biases; otherwise, the defensive prompt serves as a strict reasoning scaffold that guides the LLM to resist misleading inputs and to accurately identify PDPs indicative of malicious intent. 

C. Task Generation Agent 

To effectively mitigate risks posed by PDPs in everyday browsing, DPAgent requires a website exploration strategy that achieves broad coverage, high efficiency, and low opera-tional cost. We therefore adopt a reinforcement learning (RL) framework to optimize prompts for generating realistic and diverse website exploration tasks. A summarization model first extracts the high-level purpose of the target website, which is then used to condition prompt generation. The RL agent iteratively refines instructions to produce task lists that maxi-mize both coverage of known behaviors and novelty of useful variations. Ground-truth task lists are constructed with 140 webpages (Appendix B-A), and rewards are computed based on how well its outputs match ground-truth tasks (coverage) and introduce useful variations (novelty), yielding robust and context-aware task generation. 

Information extraction model. To enable the generation of realistic and context-aware tasks, we introduce an Information Extraction Model that summarizes the primary function of the target website. This background knowledge supports the prompt generation process by grounding it in the real-world purpose of the website. Because “About Us” pages vary widely in style and availability, we instead query the Google search engine using the site URL via Serper [32]. From the top 10 returned results, each consisting of a title and snippet, a summarization LLM ( i.e., GPT-4o) synthesizes a concise description of the website’s purpose. This summary is 

Algorithm 1: RL-Based Prompt Optimization for Task Generation 

Input: Initial prompt I0;Training dataset D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 ;Pre-trained policy model πθ (e.g., Qwen-32B); Target multimodal model M (e.g., o4-mini); Similarity threshold τs;Reward threshold τr ;Bonus reward α;Total epochs E.

Output: Optimized prompt I∗ 

> 1

Initialize PPO Agent TRL ← PPO( πθ );  

> 2

Initialize Best Prompt Set P ← ∅ ; 

> 3

for epoch = 1 to E do  

> 4

foreach batch (X, Y ) ⊂ D do  

> 5

Generate candidate prompt Icand ∼ TRL (I0); 

> 6

Predict tasks ˆY ← M (X, I cand ); 

> 7

Compute reward r ← REWARD ( ˆY , Y ); 

> 8

if SIM (Icand , P) > τ s then  

> 9

r ← r + α; 

> 10

if r > τ r then  

> 11

P ← P ∪ { (Icand , r )}; 

> 12

Update PPO Agent: TRL .step (I0, I cand , r ); 

> 13

Return I∗ ← arg max (I,r )∈P r;provided as contextual input to the downstream task generation pipeline. This summarized intent helps the downstream RL agent produce task prompts that are more aligned with the real-world use case of the site under inspection. 

Multi-agent RL-based task generation. Inspired by Pri-vAgent [33], which introduced a reinforcement learning frame-work to extract system prompts and training data from target LLMs, we adapt and extend this idea to the task generation setting. Our objective differs: rather than extracting internal information, we aim to generate high-quality exploration tasks by learning optimized instruction prompts through a reinforce-ment learning framework ( i.e., Proximal policy optimization (PPO) [34], a stable policy-based method that directly opti-mizes the policy using clipped surrogate objectives for stable and efficient updates). This component of the Task Generation Agent integrates five tightly coupled elements. The algorithm of how we use RL to do prompt optimization is described in Algorithm 1. We will introduce each element involved below:  

> •

LLM RL Agent ( TRL = P P O (πθ )). (The notations, in-troduced in Algorithm 1, refer to an LLM agent trained with PPO for prompt optimization.) The LLM RL Agent is responsible for generating high-quality textual instructions that guide the target MLLM in producing exploration tasks. To ensure that the agent can reason effectively and adapt its prompt generation strategy, we adopt Qwen-QWQ32B [35] as Policy Network ( πθ ) to propose new prompts. Qwen-QWQ32B offers strong reasoning capabilities while main-taining a manageable model size of 32 billion parameters, making it suitable for efficient RL training. We follow the PPO (Proximal Policy Optimization) reinforcement learning 6setup introduced in PrivAgent [33]. The training begins with an initial instruction prompt I0, which is refined through iterative interaction with the environment to produce new candidate prompts Icand that aim to maximize a reward signal associated with the quality of generated tasks.  

> •

Target MLLM ( M ). The candidate prompt ( Icand ) generated by the LLM RL Agent ( TRL ) is sent to the target multimodal LLM along with two additional inputs: a screenshot of the current webpage and the summarized purpose of the website generated by the Information Extraction Model. These three inputs, image, text, and instruction, require the target model to process both visual and textual modalities. We select OpenAI o4-mini as the target MLLM due to its support for multimodal input and its strong reasoning performance. The model outputs a predicted task set P , which serves as the basis for evaluating the effectiveness of the current instruction prompt.  

> •

Similarity Calculation. To evaluate the quality of the pre-dicted tasks, we compute their similarity to a reference set of ground-truth tasks. Let TG = {t1, t 2, ..., t m} denote the ground-truth tasks and TP = {t′

> 1

, t ′

> 2

, ..., t ′

> n

} the predicted tasks. The equation 1 is for a given predicted task t′ 

> y

, we apply Named Entity Recognition (NER) to the correspond-ing ground-truth task tx to extract named entities (EP), which are then replaced with placeholder spaces to construct a normalized pattern. A modified Levenshtein Distance is used to compute the token-level similarity between the predicted and reference task texts. The resulting similarity score informs both the coverage and novelty assessments used in the reward function. 

SIM (tx, t ′ 

> y

) = TSR (EP (tx), t ′ 

> y

), (1) where TSR is Token Set Ratio and EP is Extract Pattern.  

> •

Reward Function. The reward function evaluates the pre-dicted tasks based on two criteria: coverage and novelty. Coverage measures the proportion of ground-truth tasks that are accurately predicted, while novelty quantifies the proportion of new, valid tasks introduced by the model that were not part of the ground truth. These two components are defined as: cov (TP , T G) = |TG ∩ TP ||TG| , nov (TP , T G) = |TP \ TG||TP | .

(2) To balance these competing objectives, we introduce aweighting parameter p ∈ [0 , 1] , and define the reward function r as: r = p × cov (TG, T P ) + (1 − p) × nov (TG, T P ). (3) This formulation ensures that the RL agent is incentivized not only to replicate known tasks but also to discover novel yet relevant ones.  

> •

Bonus Reward ( α). To accelerate learning and stabilize the training process, we introduce a bonus reward mechanism that maintains a curated dataset of high-quality instruction prompts. If a candidate instruction prompt Icand yields a reward r above a predefined threshold τr , it will be stored in the dataset. In subsequent training rounds, newly generated instructions are evaluated for their similarity to this set of high-quality prompts. If an instruction is sufficiently similar, according to a cosine similarity or edit distance metric, a bonus reward α is added to its total reward, like equation 4. This incentivizes the RL agent to exploit successful prompt-ing patterns while still exploring new ones. 

r =

(

r + α if SIM (Icand , P) > τ s

r if SIM (Icand , P) ≤ τs

(4) Together, the Information Extraction Model and RL-Based Prompt optimization form a robust pipeline that adapts prompt generation strategies to both the structural and semantic characteristics of target websites. This enables DPAgent to formulate diverse, effective, and context-aware exploration tasks that scale across different domains. 

D. Privacy Deceptive Pattern Detection Agent 

Once the Task Generation Model generates a high-quality task list, to detect PDPs, we integrate an automated browsing agent that simulates real user interactions and collects interface data. To improve detection performance, we recruited five experts to label a dataset (the collection process is described in Appendix B-A) and selected one representative example for each use case. Then a rule-generation module uses expert-labeled examples and public guidelines to define detection logic. Finally, we apply a reasoning-capable LLM to identify violations based on these rules. This setup balances precision with adaptability and enables reliable detection across varied websites. The workflow for PDP Detection Agent starts with the website automation model, which begins executing the task list provided by the Task Generation Agent. Each time a screenshot action is triggered, the screenshot is sent not only back to the automation model but also to the detection model to determine whether any PDPs are present. 

Website automation model. Website exploration automation refers to the automated process of exploring a website using a provided webpage or website URL. The exploration can be done by brute-force algorithms, such as breadth-first search. However, brute-force methods are time-consuming and require substantial computational resources. There is also a random exploration strategy [36], but the type of webpage explored each time is too varied. Therefore, several studies have been proposed towards automatic website exploration [37], [38], [39], [40], [41]. However, some of these works rely on policy-based website exploration, which is ineffective at simulating users’ daily activities, while others propose models that exe-cute tasks in specific environments, limiting the agent’s ability to access external resources and control a computer to perform complex tasks. In DPAgent , to ensure the extensibility of 

DPAgent , we employ a computer-use agent to translate natural language task lists (obtained from the Task Generation Agent according to user behavior) into specific actions and interacting with websites. We designed this component as 7a plug-and-play module; that is, any large model that can provide sufficient understanding of executing the given tasks can be used in our DPAgent framework. However, among on-the-shelf tools, only OpenAI’s computer-use-preview [42] and Anthropic’s computer-use demo [43] have met these require-ments. We attempted to prompt other commercial MLLMs to generate computer-use-like responses. Due to the image processing techniques employed by these models, pixel-level features are often lost during image pre-processing. Given these limitations, we selected Anthropic’s Computer Use with Claude 3.7 Sonnet as our UI automation model. 

Definition generation agent. This module enhances detection specificity by producing structured, domain-aware descriptions of deceptive patterns. Using LLMs, it extracts relevant con-cepts from public taxonomies [44], regulatory guidelines, and developer documentation. These descriptions are used to guide the detection process with more accurate and context-sensitive criteria. In DPGuard [45], the prompts used to describe each deceptive pattern are derived from its taxonomy. However, Tang et al. found that incorporating human oversight can significantly improve deceptive-pattern avoidance [46]. There-fore, a key limitation lies in the absence of expert insights, concrete use cases and grooming examples, which present an opportunity to enhance detection performance and become robust to defend against grooming attacks. As highlighted in FPI [47], humans and autonomous agents exhibit distinct vul-nerabilities when perceiving deceptive patterns. To address this limitation and advance beyond the static contextual framework of the most recent work DPGuard [45], our approach integrates human heuristics with LLM-based reasoning. To construct a reliable knowledge base for our detector, we implemented a structured two-stage expert annotation pipeline. Five domain experts, each possessing over five years of experience in AI security and privacy, independently annotated deceptive patterns using our PDP taxonomy (average pairwise Cohen’s 

κ = 0 .85 ). Disagreements were resolved through a strict ma-jority voting mechanism to finalize the pattern interpretations. Next, these experts systematically sampled our taxonomy to curate concrete, real-world AI grooming examples for each category. This expert-validated dataset, combining consensus interpretations, deployment contexts, and empirical samples, was then utilized to strictly steer the LLM’s downstream reasoning processes. 

MLLM for privacy deceptive pattern detection with rea-soning. With the release of OpenAI’s Strawberry O1 [48] and the success of DeepSeek’s R1 [49], reasoning has become a key competitive capability in advancing LLM performance. Following these insights, Anthropic introduced Claude 3.7 Sonnet [50], Qwen released QwQ-32B [35], and Google launched Gemini 2.5 Pro [51], each enabling advanced rea-soning capabilities. Based on the rankings in LM Arena [52], we selected Google Gemini 2.5 Pro as our model for privacy deceptive pattern detection. 

E. Interface Repairing Agent 

To achieve automatic website user interface repairing, we employ a proxy to sniff network traffic, a memory module to store the repaired webpage snapshot, 5 repair approaches derived from Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) [53] which has been widely applied in user security and privacy de-sign [54], [55], [56], [57], and Claude Computer Use to simulate an expert performing the repairs. Table I illustrates how each privacy deceptive pattern is addressed using different repair approaches. 

Man-in-the-middle proxy. In DPAgent , MITMProxy [24] is employed to capture the network traffic between user’s web browser and the server. To minimize the impact on the user’s browsing experience, we only monitor requests sent from the web browser by checking the ‘sec-ch-ua’ and ‘user-agent’ headers, and only intercept HTTP responses that start with ‘ <!doctype html >’. All the collected request and response data will stay locally and not be sent to the LLM. The Man-in-the-middle proxy will compare the request within the memory and return the repaired webpage. 

Memory. To reduce the time required for detecting and re-pairing PDPs on the same webpage during a user’s subsequent visit, we integrate a retrieval mechanism called Memory into 

DPAgent . Each time a web UI is repaired, the repair record (e.g., specific repair methods and PDP zones) and cookie settings are stored as a snapshot in the memory. When the user revisits the same webpage, a stored snapshot will be retrieved by the MITM proxy, and rendering together with the webpage by user’s browser, instead of triggering grooming purifying, task generation, and PDP detection agents, for efficient and consistent page rendering. By adopting a plug-and-play design, Users can transfer memory data between different devices or adopt a more advanced strategy, such as training on a powerful machine and deploying on other edge devices. 

Repair approaches. We developed 5 repair approaches grounded in Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) [53], a framework commonly used to explain how individuals re-spond to perceived threats. PMT posits that interventions can motivate self-protective behavior by influencing two key cognitive processes: threat appraisal, which refers to the extent to which individuals perceive themselves to be at risk, and coping appraisal, which refers to the perceived effectiveness of their responses in mitigating the threat. This aligns with our objective of repairing PDPs in web UIs. Accordingly, we adopted PMT as the theoretical foundation for our design, mapping our awareness and action mechanisms to threat and coping appraisal, respectively. We achieve this by both revealing the risks associated with PDPs and guiding users toward effective countermeasures. Because querying LLMs for the most appropriate repair strategy may sometimes break webpage functionality, and some decisions ( e.g., blocking con-tent for cookie consent) may also be illegal under regulatory policies, therefore in Table I, we illustrate how the proposed re-pair approaches ( i.e., Warning, Highlighting Important Links, Block Content, Auto Cookie Setting, and UI Cleaning) are 8TABLE I: Repair approaches.   

> Privacy Types Deceptive Patterns Repair Approach Warning Highlighting Important Links Block Content Auto Cookie Setting UI Cleaning
> Information Concealment Hidden Information Disguised Ads - wo Hint Disguised Ads - w Hint Interface Obstruction Pre-Selection False Hierarchy Small Close Button Forced Data Disclosure Privacy Zuckering Forced Action

applied across 7 PDPs with the most appropriate solution to guarantee the webpage functionality.  

> •

Warning. The Warning repair refers to adding a highlighted message before the deceptive pattern element to alert users to potential privacy risks. We choose not to directly remove the risky contents since they may be related to user’s interaction with website, for example, a privacy policy claim or a user consent session. Specifically, this approach is applied in two scenarios: 

– Compliance with Regulatory Policy but Violation of Privacy Autonomy: Some deceptive patterns undermine users’ privacy autonomy but still comply with regulatory policies. These include Hidden Information, Disguised Ads with Hint, Pre-selection, and Small Close Button. In such cases, we are only permitted to provide warnings rather than intervene directly on the user’s behalf. 

– Forced Privacy Disclosure for Service Continuation: Some patterns force users to disclose personal information before being allowed to proceed. Examples include Pri-vacy Zuckering and Forced Actions. In these cases, when users still wish to use the service, the most reasonable approach is to issue a warning rather than restrict access.  

> •

Highlighting Important Links. For certain PDPs, such as Hidden Information, Privacy Zuckering, and Forced Actions, important privacy-related information is often embedded within hyperlinks that are deliberately made small or visu-ally inconspicuous, making them difficult for users to notice. To preserve user autonomy, we propose a second repair approach that highlights these important links, ensuring users can easily access and evaluate the relevant information.  

> •

Block Content. The Block Content repair is applied specif-ically to the deceptive pattern Disguised Ads without Hint. In this case, there is no indication that the content is an advertisement, which violates regulatory policies. As a result, we are permitted to take strict action by removing the ad elements from the current webpage.  

> •

Auto Cookie Setting. Auto Cookie Setting is where users intend to accept only necessary cookies, but non-essential cookies ( e.g., performance analytics or personalized adver-tising cookies) are also accepted. This often occurs when designers use False Hierarchy deceptive pattern to induce users into accepting all cookies, even when they explicitly choose only the necessary ones. To protect users’ choices, we automatically reset the cookie settings to align with their original intention of accepting only the necessary cookies.  

> •

UI Cleaning. False Hierarchy often deceives users by mak-TABLE II: Defense performance against grooming attack.                  

> Dataset # Instances Precision Recall F1-Score
> Original Benign Images 233 0.9406 0.8155 0.8736 Generate Benign Images 1.0000 0.4217 0.5933 Generate Benign Images (With Defense Prompt) 1.0000 0.4826 0.6510 Generate Benign Images (With Grooming Filter) 21 1.0000 0.2381 0.3846 Generate Benign Images (With Grooming Filter and Defense Prompt) 1.0000 0.3333 0.5000

Note: Original refers to naturally occurring (non-AI-generated) images. 

ing one option appear more prominent than others. To repair this deceptive pattern, we propose UI Cleaning, which involves standardizing the appearance of all buttons, such as using the same color and style, to eliminate the visual dominance of the designer’s preferred option. IV. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

In this section, we present the evaluation results of defense against AI grooming, task list generation, website exploration, PDP detection, and interface repair, respectively. The dataset collection process for each task is described in Appendix B-A. Additionally, we conducted an empirical study that revealed several noteworthy findings. 

A. Grooming Attacks and Defenses 

We note that executing a real-world grooming attack on a live supply chain is constrained by ethical and practical boundaries: frontier LLMs are proprietary, and disseminating groomed samples outside an isolated environment would vio-late research ethics. Instead, we verify the existence and impact of grooming attacks by demonstrating that AI models are measurably compromised by groomed samples in controlled settings. Our grooming purifying agent is designed as amodular component that can help any boundary object filter out groomed samples, regardless of the downstream model. To demonstrate that the grooming attack can reduce the performance on the PDP benign category (i.e., No-PDP) detection, we conducted an experiment comparing detection performance on the grooming filter evaluation dataset (see Appendix B-B), which contains 233 original benign and 233 generated benign website screenshots. As shown in Ta-ble II, DPAgent achieves an F1 score of 0.8736 on original screenshots, but its performance decreases by 28.03% on the generated grooming screenshots, which only achieve 0.5933. This confirms that the grooming attack is a significant threat that must be considered in all AI-involved tasks. For defense, we propose two strategies that can be applied at different stages. Since the grooming attack typically occurs during the model training stage, filtering out the generated images before the training data enters the training process is critical. In Appendix D, Table IX compares the performance of the finetuned grooming filter on the grooming filter evaluation dataset, where we were surprised to see fine-tuned Efficient-Net [30] achieve 0.9022 on both Micro F1 and Macro F1 scores. In Table II, we demonstrated the grooming filter can defend 90.98% ( = 233 −21 233 ) generated grooming images. 9TABLE III: Performance of LLM grooming attacks and de-fenses (measured by Pearson correlation).                                         

> Defense Type Noise Generation Pixel Modification Invisible Text Alpha Channel Unreadable Text
> No Defense 0.4848 0.4727 0.5272 0.7939 0.5212 CLIP Detection (openai/clip-vit-base-patch16) 0.3939 0.3878 0.4606 0.6363 0.4909 Grooming Filter 0.3575 0.3818 0.3757 0.6181 0.4363 Defense Prompt 0.4787 0.4606 0.5091 0.7636 0.5152 Grooming Filter + Defense Prompt 0.3394 0.3636 0.3696 0.5939 0.4303 Correlation With CLIP (openai/clip-vit-base-patch16) 0.7339 0.7420 0.6302 0.7057 0.7989 Correlation With CLIP (openai/clip-vit-base-patch32) 0.6965 0.8238 0.7161 0.6961 0.8201 Correlation With CLIP (openai/clip-vit-large-patch14-336) 0.7117 0.6197 0.5425 0.6512 0.7974

To verify that our grooming filter captures meaningful differences between original and generated grooming images, we computed the Pearson correlation between its latent rep-resentations and those from several CLIP encoders [29]. As shown in Table III, we observe consistently high positive correlations across grooming types and CLIP variants, for instance, when correlated with ‘openai/clip-vit-base-patch16’, the coefficients are 0.7339 for Noise Generation, 0.7420 for Pixel Modification, 0.6302 for Invisible Text, 0.7057 for Alpha Channel, and a notable 0.7989 for Unreadable Text. Similar strong correlations are observed with ‘openai/clip-vit-base-patch32’ ( e.g., 0.8238 for Pixel Modification, 0.8201 for Unreadable Text) and ‘openai/clip-vit-large-patch14-336’ ( e.g., 

0.7117 for Noise Generation, 0.7974 for Unreadable Text). These strong correlations indicate that both models perceive similar degrees of feature-level difference between original and generated grooming images, suggesting that our filter has learned to detect semantically meaningful alterations, those that CLIP, a general-purpose model trained on large-scale data, also recognizes as salient. This alignment provides strong empirical support that our grooming filter is not overfitting to dataset-specific artifacts, but rather isolating generalizable and adversarially relevant features. In short, the high correlation with CLIP validates the robustness of our filter’s internal representation, confirming its effectiveness in detecting subtle, structured manipulations introduced by grooming attacks. However, as a gap remains in achieving perfect binary clas-sification between original and generated grooming images, we also incorporate defense prompt, which is generated by the Definition Generation Model, into the detection stage. As shown in Table II, the defense prompt successfully defends against these grooming attacks by improving 0.06 on F1 scores on the generated grooming images. If we apply both the grooming filter and defense prompt, there is 0.1154 F1-score increase when compared with using the grooming filter only. To simulate a realistic scenario where the attacker is more advanced and has preliminary knowledge, we also conducted an ablation study to evaluate the effectiveness of the grooming filter and the defense prompt across five attack techniques. Table III shows that both the filter and defense prompts are effective, and combining both yields the best performance. The final attack success rates for noise generation, pixel modification, invisible text, alpha channel, and unreadable text are 0.3394 (-14.54%), 0.3636 (-10.91%), 0.3696 (-15.76%), 0.5939 (-20.00%), and 0.4303 (-9.09%), respectively. TABLE IV: Performance of exploration approaches.           

> Approach # of Visited Webpages Coverage of DP Instances
> BFS 4395 0.6667 (=86/129) Random Exploration [36] 2797 0.4729(=61/129) WebUI [40] 3420 0.3721 (=48/129)
> DPAgent (Ours) 418 0.8062 (=104/129)

Takeaway 1: When employing the MLLM to per-form privacy deceptive pattern detection, the grooming attack significantly degrades the prediction performance. To counter this, combining a robust filtering mechanism with defense prompts provides the most effective protection. The ablation study confirms that using both strategies together yields the best defense against multiple attack techniques, highlighting the importance of multilayered defense in real-world scenarios. B. RL Training in Task Generation Agent 

During RL-based prompt optimization training, we evaluate model performance on the DPAgent RL-based Prompt opti-mization test set at the end of each batch. The training process consists of 50 batches over 5 epochs, with 10 batches per epoch. In Appendix C, Figure 4 presents the reward achieved in each batch. To reflect overall performance per epoch, we also compute the average reward across all batches within each epoch. The figure shows a clear upward trend in rewards over the course of training, with both batch-level and epoch-level metrics reaching their highest values by the final epoch. The average rewards after 48 batches are presented in Appendix C Table VIII, the 2x2 ablation study clearly demon-strates that both components, Website Information Extraction and RL-based Prompt optimization, contribute independently and synergistically to task generation quality. Disabling both modules yields the lowest reward of 0.3350. Enabling only the RL-engineered prompt nearly doubles this baseline to 0.6626, representing a 97.9% increase. Enabling only the web-level context results in a more modest but still substantial improvement, raising the reward to 0.4585 (+36.8%). Criti-cally, enabling both modules increases the reward to 0.7140, outperforming the prompt-only configuration by 7.8% and the web-info-only configuration by 55.8%. These results confirm that integrating structured website context with an optimised prompt is essential for maximising DPAgent ’s effectiveness on task generation. 

Takeaway 2: To assist MLLMs in generating more reliable and executable tasks, both website information and RL-based prompt optimization are essential. C. Efficiency of Website Exploration Automation 

To evaluate website exploration automation efficiency, we compare DPAgent with brute-force-based strategy, Breath-First Search (BFS), random exploration, and policy strategy, WebUI [40]. Performance is summarized in Table IV. All four approaches were run on the same DPAgent RL-based Prompt optimization Testing dataset, consisting of 40 hostnames. For each hostname, we manually recorded the presence of each 10 of seven predefined privacy deceptive pattern types. After merging the results from the three strategies, we identified 129 privacy deceptive pattern type instances out of a possible 280 (7 types x 40 hostnames) across the 40 hostnames. We define PDP type coverage as the number of deceptive pattern type instances detected by a given approach, divided by the total 129 privacy deceptive pattern type instances observed across all methods. To ensure time efficiency, we limited the BFS approach and random exploration to a maximum depth of 3 and capped the exploration list size at 200 URLs per domain for random exploration and WebUI [40]. Under these constraints, BFS achieved a 66.67% coverage rate by collecting a total of 4,395 webpages, random exploration got 47.29% coverage rate from viewing 2,797 webpages, and WebUI achieved 37.21% by visiting 3,420 webpages. In contrast, DPAgent achieved the highest coverage, 80.62%, while exploring only 9.5%, 14.9% and 12.2% of the pages visited by BFS, random exploration, and WebUI, respectively. These results demonstrate that DPAgent ’s dynamic, user-simulated exploration strategy is more effective than brute-force and strategy-based website exploration methods under time- and computational resource-constrained conditions. 

Takeaway 3: DPAgent adopts a user activity–simulated website exploration approach and achieves a privacy de-ceptive pattern type coverage rate of 80.62%, which is 13.95%, 33.33% and 43.41% higher than BFS, random exploration, and WebUI. Remarkably, DPAgent achieves this performance by visiting a set webpages that amount to only 9.5%, 14.9%, and 12.2% of the number visited by BFS, random exploration, and WebUI, respectively. D. Privacy Deceptive Pattern (PDP) Detection 

We evaluated four PDP detection models across DP detec-tion tasks and privacy protection tasks, using the DPAgent 

privacy deceptive pattern detection dataset, which contains a total of 515 instances spanning benign and deceptive types. For each model’s performance evaluation, we excluded any deceptive pattern category the model does not support and used the F1 score to measure overall performance, as it accounts for both false positives and false negatives. The final results are presented in Table V, where DPAgent achieves a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance with a micro-average F1 score of 0.8162 and a macro-average F1 score of 0.6914. These scores represent improvements of 27.84% and 38.64% over the current SOTA model, DPGuard, respectively. Notably, across all specific privacy deceptive pattern categories, DPAgent 

only failed in detecting privacy zuckering category. 

Takeaway 4: DPAgent employs a complementary defi-nition generation strategy that integrates grooming sample and human expertise with LLM-based agent understanding, along with enhanced reasoning capabilities. This approach significantly boosts detection performance, outperforming the current SOTA model, DPGuard. DPAgent sets a

TABLE V: Performance of PDP detection.                                                            

> Type Deceptive Patterns Instances DPGuard [45] AidUI [58] ALSACNC [10] DPAgent (Ours)
> No DP No DP 233 0.7140 0.6150 0.5181 0.8736
> Information Concealment Hidden Information 63 0.2105 -0.2035 0.8143
> Disguised Ads 106 0.7273 0.2837 -0.9223
> UI Manipulation Preselection 80.2381 0.0635 -0.5714
> False Hierarchy 25 0.2759 0.0000 -0.6364
> Small Close Button 28 0.3590 --0.7111
> Forced Data Disclosure Privacy Zuckering 60.4444 0.0000 0.2222 0.2857 Forced Action 46 --0.1538 0.7167
> micro avg 515 0.5890 0.4315 0.3449 0.8162
> macro avg 0.4242 0.1924 0.2744 0.6914 0%
> 5%
> 10%
> 0%
> 5%
> 10%
> 15%
> 20%
> 25%
> 30%
> 35%
> 40%
> 45%
> 50%
> 55%
> 60%
> 65%
> 70%
> 75%
> 80%
> 85%
> 90%
> Percentage of Responses
> Do you agree DPAgent will not
> affect your normal browsing
> experience?
> Do you agree DPAgent can help
> you mitigate the online
> privacy risk?
> 8% 85%
> 2% 82%
> Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly Agree

Fig. 3: Rate score distribution in the user study. 

new SOTA performance with a micro-average F1 score of 0.8162 and a macro-average F1 score of 0.6914. E. Automatic Interface Repair 

After the PDPs are successfully captured, an automatic interface repair process is triggered. To evaluate DPAgent ’s performance on the repair task, we first measure the deceptive pattern repair rate across 418 webpages on the deceptive pattern detection dataset. To further demonstrate both the effectiveness of DPAgent and its impact on the website browsing experience, we also conducted a user study involving eight use cases, where 40 global participants were required to rate the effectiveness and its influence on their browsing expe-rience. Each evaluation approach is detailed in the following. 

Repair rate. Among the 418 webpages in the DPAgent 

Privacy Deceptive Pattern Dataset, there are 233 benign in-stances and 282 deceptive instances. After applying DPAgent 

for deceptive pattern detection, 243 out of 282 deceptive instances (86.17%) were correctly identified. We then applied the concrete repair approaches described in Section III-E and manually reviewed these 243 detected deceptive instances. Of these, 218 were successfully repaired, resulting in a repair rate of 0.7730. In the instances where repair failed, we found that disguised ads without hints were the most difficult to address for two main reasons: the ambiguous decision-making boundary, which challenges the model when specifying the advertisement’s location, and the complex structure of the HTML elements, which makes it challenging for the model to remove the element based solely on pixel-level information. 

User study. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a PDP repair tool. To evaluate our tool, DPAgent ,we conducted a user study to assess both its effectiveness and 11 its impact on the user’s browsing experience. In our survey’s rating question, 1 refers to strongly negative and 5 to strongly positive. Ideally, a score closer to 5 indicates that DPAgent is more effective in helping users mitigate online privacy threats and has a positive impact on improving their daily online browsing experience. Figure 3 illustrates the rate distribution of effectiveness and impact across 40 participants. In statistics, the average effectiveness rating for DPAgent was 4.10 (55% of the participants rated above 4), and the average rating for its impact on the browsing experience was 4.16 (60% of the participants rated above 4). Both scores suggest that DPAgent 

is effective in mitigating privacy-deceptive pattern risks while also enhancing the overall browsing experience. More details about the user study, including participants’ levels of concern about website privacy and the proportion of PDP examples they had encountered before, are provided in Appendix E, and the real-world examples comparing websites before and after repair are presented in Appendix F. 

Takeaway 5: DPAgent achieved a repair rate of 0.7703 on the privacy deceptive pattern detection dataset. Re-garding performance, the average effectiveness rating was 4.10, while the average rating for its impact on the web browsing experience was 4.16. These results indicate that 

DPAgent is effective in helping users mitigate privacy-deceptive patterns while also positively enhancing their browsing experience. F. Empirical Evaluation in the Wild 

To raise awareness among users and regulators, and uncover insights for stakeholders, we conducted an empirical study on a real-world website dataset. The study reveals five key findings across website-level, pattern-level, and geographic dimensions. 

Website-level study. We ran DPAgent on 485 selected websites from the wild dataset and obtained 5,206 webpages. Regarding the prevalence of PDPs across websites, when we only browsed the homepage, we found that 167 websites (34.43%) contained such patterns. We randomly selected 17 websites from the set of 167 and manually checked for the presence of PDPs. The results validate that 94.11% of these websites do contain PDPs. When dynamically exploring the entire websites, 476 websites (98.14%) were found to include at least one privacy deceptive pattern. Concerning the repair of these patterns, we attempted to repair the PDPs on the homepages and found that while most could be addressed, 47 websites (9.69%) could not be successfully repaired. This was primarily due to complex HTML element hierarchies that caused the repair process to fail. 

Privacy deceptive pattern-level study. We also analyzed the statistical data produced by running DPAgent to reveal key findings, such as the most frequently violated deceptive patterns and the most difficult deceptive patterns to repair, at the privacy deceptive pattern level. Our analysis revealed that the top three most frequently violated PDPs are Hidden Information (18.2%), Forced Action (15.6%), and Disguised Ads (10.6%). For repair, we defined a privacy deceptive pattern as repairable only if it can be detected. Based on this criterion, the results indicate that Disguised Ads emerged as the most difficult type to repair. 

Geographic study. To examine how PDPs vary in risk across different regions, we conducted a geographic study by filtering the top 50 websites based on their domain suffixes corre-sponding to four regions: Asia, America, Europe, and Oceania. To highlight the risk exposure, we only analyzed the PDPs present on the homepage. The results show the prevalence of PDPs as follows: Oceania (84%), Asia (80%), America (78%), and Europe (70%). This is perhaps because Oceania’s digital ecosystem is dominated by sectors such as news, sports, gambling, and finance, where DPs are commonly used to drive engagement and consent, making even casual homepage visits riskier, revealing technical and regulatory gaps. 

Takeaway 6: The empirical study reveals that 34.43% of websites contain at least one privacy deceptive pattern on their homepage. When the entire website is thoroughly explored, this rate increases to 98.14%. By applying 

DPAgent , more than 90% of these PDPs can be repaired. At the privacy deceptive pattern level analysis, the most frequently violated pattern is Hidden Information, while the most difficult to repair is Disguised Ads. In the ge-ographic analysis, Oceania is shown to be the riskiest region, even when considering only the homepage. G. Runtime Experimental Setup & Performance Evaluation 

Our runtime evaluation used two hardware environments:  

> •

GPU-intensive tasks: NVIDIA A100 GPU (80 GB), 16-core CPU, 128 GB RAM.  

> •

Others: Apple M1 Max, 10-core CPU, 32 GB RAM. The software stack included browser automation with the Claude Computer Use tool, PDP detection using Gemini Pro 2.5, DOM interception and rewriting via MITMProxy, and grooming filtering based on EfficientNet-V2-L. Each mod-ule was benchmarked under cold-start conditions (caching disabled) and averaged over three trials. Yielding: 1.6 s for exploration, 0.9 s for detection, and 1.1 s for repair per page. V. R ELATED WORK 

In this section, we review recent efforts on website privacy, deceptive pattern (DP) detection, and privacy protection tools. A summary of representative studies is provided in Table VI. 

Website privacy and UI-level threats. Recent research has examined web privacy from a fragmented perspective. Tradi-tional tools primarily focus on network-level intrusions and tracking behaviors [69], [70], [71], [72]. More recent efforts have shifted attention to UI-layer threats, including cookie consent banners [59], [60], [10], [11], ad injection [61], [62], and phishing interfaces [63], [64]. CookieInspect [59] conducted the first large-scale audit of GDPR compliance under the IAB Europe Transparency and Consent Framework, uncovering widespread violations. CookieBlock [60] proposed a learning-based client-side filter to block invasive cookies without requiring cooperation from websites. ALSACNC [10] 12 TABLE VI: An overview of existing web privacy tools.                     

> Web Privacy Tools Information Concealment Interface Obstruction Forced Data Disclosure Fully Automated Adaptable Robustness against Grooming
> Hidden Information Disguised Ads Preselection False Hierarchy Small Close Buttons Privacy Zuckering Forced Action CookieInspect [59] CookieGraph [11] CookieBlock [60] ALSACNC [10] AdsInjector [61] ODIN [62] Golden Hour [63] PhishIntention [64] Mathur et al. [65] Nazarov et al. [66] AidUI [58] UIGuard [67] Sch¨ afer et al. [68] DPGuard [45]
> DPAgent (Ours)
> (/): the item is fully (partially/not) present.

extended these analyses to multilingual settings, while Cook-ieGraph [11] revealed hidden first-party profiling activities that evade conventional third-party tracking detection. Despite their impact, these studies target specific UI elements or threat types in isolation, whereas DPs capture a broader class of manipulative interface strategies that systematically undermine user privacy and agency. 

Deceptive pattern detection. Existing DP detection methods span clustering-based [65], [66], rule-based [58], [67], and more recent LLM-powered approaches such as DPGuard [45]. Clustering-based methods group UI elements using textual or visual features and assign pattern labels to clusters. Rule-based approaches extract properties from screenshots and UI trees and apply handcrafted heuristics to identify deceptive behaviors. For example, AidUI [58] targets both web and mobile platforms by matching icon shapes, color schemes, and textual cues, while UIGuard [67] focuses on mobile apps using element-level features. DPGuard [45] leverages LLMs and carefully designed prompts to reason over UI screenshots and achieve strong detection performance. However, such methods still rely on fixed taxonomies and static prompts, making them brittle to evolving or adaptive threats, including AI grooming. More broadly, existing approaches are siloed, static, and primarily detection-oriented. In contrast, our work treats PDPs as a system-level problem and introduces DPAgent 

as a unified, reasoning-aware multi-agent framework that dynamically interacts with live web interfaces to explore, detect, and repair deceptive patterns. Inspired by human and AI verifier alignment in GUI verification [73], DPAgent 

bridges automated reasoning with interactive exploration and repairing, explicitly addressing threats co-shaped by LLMs. 

Mitigation and privacy protection tools. On the mitigation side, Sch¨ afer et al. [68] demonstrate that feeding HTML source code into LLMs enables iterative repair of deceptive patterns through prompt refinement. While promising, their approach has two key limitations. First, it targets only seven patterns that are easiest for LLMs to identify, among which only two are privacy-related. Second, it does not guarantee webpage-safe modifications, risking functional breakage and limiting real-world applicability. Other widely used tools, such as Tor [74], Brave [75], Adblock Plus [76], AdGuard [77], and DuckDuckGo [78], mitigate UI intrusions by blocking trackers, fingerprinting, ads, or cookie dialogs. Adblock Plus provides filter-based control to hide ad frames, tracking pixels, and consent dialogs. AdGuard goes further by automatically dismissing cookie pop-ups and collapsing banners before ren-dering. DuckDuckGo emphasizes tracker-free and encrypted search, reducing exposure at the search layer rather than within page interfaces. Although effective in practice, these tools depend on predefined rules and provider-driven updates, and they do not generalize well to unseen deceptive behaviors or support adaptive, interactive defenses. In contrast, DPAgent 

builds a PDP taxonomy grounded in DPGuard [45] (see Ap-pendix A) but extends it to cover a broader spectrum of privacy risks. It fills a critical gap by offering a reinforcement-driven, multi-agent framework capable of autonomous exploration, reasoning-based detection, and webpage-safe repair across the full privacy interface pipeline, enabling adaptive and proactive defense against evolving deceptive UI practices. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We examine website UI privacy through the lens of DPs and introduce a new class of threat, AI grooming attacks, which subtly degrade model performance by manipulating benign inputs. To address this, we present the DPAgent framework, comprising four components: Grooming Purifying Agent, Task Generation Agent, Deceptive Pattern Detection Agent, and Interface Repair Agent. Our experiments show that DPAgent 

effectively mitigates grooming attacks (detecting 90.98% of generated samples), explores websites efficiently (covering 81.10% of privacy patterns while visiting only 9.5%–12.2% as many pages as baselines), detects privacy deceptive patterns with new SOTA performance, and repairs interfaces reliably. We acknowledge that DPAgent is a research prototype aimed at demonstrating feasibility and robustness. Runtime cost is mitigated by caching repaired pages and triggering heavy components only once per domain. Privacy is preserved by processing data locally or via anonymized APIs without storing user identifiers. While full browser-scale deployment remains challenging, key components ( e.g., grooming filter, PDP detector) can be modularized into lightweight extensions. Future work will optimize for real-time use and edge deploy-13 ment. Though effective in exploration, detection, repair, and grooming defense, DPAgent occasionally misses dense or complex web layouts due to MLLM limitations. Improving reasoning or exploring alternative generative models may ad-dress this. Finally, we hope our work raises awareness among all boundary objects ( e.g., end users, researchers, regulators, developers) about the prevalence of PDPs on websites and encourages proactive measures for protection. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Zewei Shi is supported by CSIRO Full PhD Scholarship. Feng Liu is supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) with grant numbers DP230101540 and DE240101089, and the NSF-CSIRO Responsible AI program with grant number 2303037. Minhui Xue and Xingliang Yuan are sup-ported by CSIRO – National Science Foundation (US) AI Research Collaboration Program. We especially acknowledge and thank Dr. Jieshan Chen for her early guidance, advice on the background of deceptive (dark) patterns, and comments on an initial draft of this paper. ETHICS CONSIDERATIONS 

I. Motivation for Publishing 

The intersection of Large Language Models (LLMs) and web interfaces presents a profound dual-use dilemma. While agentic AI can significantly enhance user experience and automate complex tasks, it concurrently introduces severe risks via “AI grooming”, where attackers exploit data voids to inject human-benign but ground-truth malicious samples, corrupting model reasoning and normalizing privacy deceptive patterns (PDPs). The fundamental motivation for publishing this re-search is strictly defensive. It is imperative to formalize this emerging threat model and openly discuss proactive, agent-in-the-middle defense mechanisms like DPAgent . Establishing robust grooming purification and interface repair frameworks before widespread malicious exploitation of the AI supply chain occurs is critical for ensuring that AI-mediated web ecosystems remain safe and trustworthy. 

II. Stakeholder Analysis 

We identify four primary stakeholders affected by this research:  

> •

End-Users (Beneficiaries): Everyday web users who are increasingly exposed to manipulative interfaces and privacy risks. They are the primary beneficiaries, gaining an automated tool ( DPAgent ) that proactively protects their privacy autonomy without disrupting their browsing experience.  

> •

Model Developers and Web Ecosystem Providers: 

Organizations training frontier LLMs or operating web crawlers. They benefit from the proposed latent-space purification mechanisms, gaining verifiable methods to prevent their data pipelines from being poisoned by deceptive artifacts.  

> •

The Scientific Community and Regulators: Beneficia-ries of a formalized taxonomy for AI grooming and PDPs. This research provides a transparent framework to audit web interfaces and enforce privacy compliance at scale.  

> •

Malicious Actors (Adversaries): Entities attempting to execute supply-chain poisoning or UI manipulation for data harvesting and economic espionage. Their ability to bypass human-in-the-loop security audits will be signifi-cantly hindered by our proposed defenses. 

III. Impact Assessment and Experimental Safeguards  

> •

Positive Impacts: DPAgent provides a vital defense-in-depth tool that operates directly in live web environments, offering both supply-chain purification and real-time user interface repair. This work aligns with responsible AI principles by equipping systems to recognize and resist subtle, long-term manipulation without compromising user autonomy. Crucially, our defenses emphasize trans-parency and semantic robustness, avoiding silent or coer-cive interventions (e.g., relying on user-facing warnings and highlighting instead).  

> •

Mitigation of Misuse Risks: To study AI grooming safely, all manipulated content was synthetically gener-ated; no data was scraped from real users or deployed systems. Furthermore, we deliberately omit implementa-tion details and raw adversarial prompts that could enable misuse by malicious actors, ensuring our evaluation re-mains rigorous without proliferating actionable exploits.  

> •

Human Subjects Protection: This study was approved by our institutional Human Research Ethics Committee. Participation was voluntary, with informed consent ob-tained from all participants, who could withdraw at any time using a pre-assigned keyword. We collected only non-identifiable demographic data ( e.g., age range, coun-try, gender) necessary for analysis, and implemented strict confidentiality measures to mitigate any re-identification risk. All analyses were conducted on aggregated or de-identified data. REFERENCES [1] M. Golebiewski and D. Boyd, “Data voids: Where missing data can easily be exploited,” Data&Society, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Data-Voi ds-2.0-Final.pdf [2] M. Sadeghi and I. Blachez, “A well-funded moscow-based global ‘news’ network has infected western artificial intelligence tools worldwide with russian propaganda,” 2025, accessed: 2025-12-16. [Online]. Available: https://www.newsguardrealitycheck.com/p/a-well-funded-moscow-bas ed-global [3] A. Radina, “Is Russia grooming AI chatbots?” 2025. [4] A. S. Project, “A pro-russia content network foreshadows the automated future of info ops,” American Sunlight Project, Tech. Rep., 2025. [5] A. Newport and N. Jankowicz, “Russian networks flood the internet with propaganda aiming to corrupt ai chatbots,” 2025, accessed: 2025-05-29. [Online]. Available: https://bit.ly/43j5htv [6] V. Chatelet and A. Lesplingart, “Russia-linked pravda network: Wikipedia, llm, x,” 2025, accessed: 2025-05-29. [Online]. Available: https://dfrlab.org/2025/03/12/pravda-network-wikipedia-llm-x/ [7] S. Freuden and R. Serrano, “Llm grooming: A new strategy to weaponise ai for fimi purposes,” 2025, accessed: 2025-05-29. [Online]. Available: https://www.disinfo.eu/outreach/our-webinars/10-april-llm-g rooming-a-new-strategy-to-weaponise-ai-for-fimi-purposes/ 

14 [8] V. Krauß, M. McGill, T. Kosch, Y. M. Thiel, D. Sch¨ on, and J. Gugen-heimer, “Create a fear of missing out - chatgpt implements unsolicited deceptive designs in generated websites without warning,” in Proceed-ings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2025, pp. 1–20. [9] C. M. Gray, Y. Kou, B. Battles, J. Hoggatt, and A. L. Toombs, “The dark (patterns) side of UX design,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2018, pp. 1–14. [10] A. Bouhoula, K. Kubicek, A. Zac, C. Cotrini, and D. Basin, “Automated Large-Scale analysis of cookie notice compliance,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . Philadelphia, PA: USENIX Association, 2024, pp. 1723–1739. [11] S. Munir, S. Siby, U. Iqbal, S. Englehardt, Z. Shafiq, and C. Troncoso, “Cookiegraph: Understanding and detecting first-party tracking cookies,” in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2023, p. 3490–3504. [12] C. Utz, M. Degeling, S. Fahl, F. Schaub, and T. Holz, “(un) informed consent: Studying gdpr consent notices in the field,” in Proceedings of the 2019 acm sigsac conference on computer and communications security , 2019, pp. 973–990. [13] T. T. Nguyen, M. Backes, and B. Stock, “Freely given consent? studying consent notice of third-party tracking and its violations of gdpr in android apps,” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2022, pp. 2369–2383. [14] E. Geller, “Ai-powered attacks rise as cisos prioritize ai security risks,” 

Cybersecurity Dive , 2025, accessed: 2025-11-25. [Online]. Available: https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/ai-security-risks-agents-repor t/753345/ [15] A. Clark, “Deepfake videos impersonating real doctors push false medical advice and treatments,” CBS News , 2025, accessed: 2025-11-25. [Online]. Available: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/deepfake-vid eos-impersonating-real-doctors-push-false-medical-advice-treatments/ [16] K. Collier, “More ai-generated child sex abuse material is being posted online,” NBC News , 2024, accessed: 2025-11-25. [Online]. Available: https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/security/ai-generated-child-sex-abuse-m aterial-posted-online-rcna162169 [17] M. Alyukov, M. Makhortykh, A. Voronovici, and M. Sydorova, “Chatbot responses to disinformation-related prompts,” 2025, accessed: 2025-11-25. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/WVZKJ [18] ——, “Is russia really ‘grooming’ western ai?” Aljazeera , 2025, accessed: 2025-11-25. [Online]. Available: https://www.aljazeera.com/ opinions/2025/7/8/is-russia-really-grooming-western [19] Y. Liu, X. Ma, J. Bailey, and F. Lu, “Reflection backdoor: A natural backdoor attack on deep neural networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020, pp. 182–199. [20] A. Wei, N. Haghtalab, and J. Steinhardt, “Jailbroken: How does llm safety training fail?” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023, pp. 80 079–80 110. [21] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,” in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2014. [22] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against support vector machines,” in Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine Learning , 2012, p. 1467–1474. [23] Q. Xia and Q. Chen, “Alphadog: No-box camouflage attacks via alpha channel oversight,” in The Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2025 , 2025. [24] A. Cortesi, M. Hils, T. Kriechbaumer, and contributors, “mitmproxy: A free and open source interactive HTTPS proxy,” 2010–, [Version 11.1]. [Online]. Available: https://mitmproxy.org/ [25] A. Abusnaina, Y. Wu, S. Arora, Y. Wang, F. Wang, H. Yang, and D. Mohaisen, “Adversarial example detection using latent neighborhood graph,” in Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 7687–7696. [26] R. Feinman, R. R. Curtin, S. Shintre, and A. B. Gardner, “Detecting adversarial samples from artifacts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00410 ,2017. [27] M. Moayeri and S. Feizi, “Sample efficient detection and classification of adversarial attacks via self-supervised embeddings,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 7677–7686. [28] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02136 , 2016. [29] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion,” in International conference on machine learning , 2021, pp. 8748– 8763. [30] M. Tan and Q. Le, “Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for con-volutional neural networks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 6105–6114. [31] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in International conference on machine learning . PmLR, 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [32] Serper.dev, “Serper.dev: The world’s fastest and cheapest google search api,” 2025, accessed: 2025-04-19. [Online]. Available: https://serper.dev/ [33] Y. Nie, Z. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Wu, X. Zhao, W. Guo, and D. Song, “Privagent: Agentic-based red-teaming for llm privacy leakage,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05734 , 2024. [34] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 ,2017. [35] Q. Team, “Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learning,” March 2025. [Online]. Available: https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwq-3 2b/ [36] A. Stafeev and G. Pellegrino, “SoK: State of the krawlers –evaluating the effectiveness of crawling algorithms for web security measurements,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . Philadelphia, PA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2024, pp. 719–737. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity 24/presentation/stafeev [37] H. He, W. Yao, K. Ma, W. Yu, Y. Dai, H. Zhang, Z. Lan, and D. Yu, “Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13919 , 2024. [38] Y. Zhang, Z. Ma, Y. Ma, Z. Han, Y. Wu, and V. Tresp, “Webpilot: A versatile and autonomous multi-agent system for web task execution with strategic exploration,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2025, pp. 23 378–23 386. [39] Y. Qin, Y. Ye, J. Fang, H. Wang, S. Liang, S. Tian, J. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Li, S. Huang et al. , “Ui-tars: Pioneering automated gui interaction with native agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12326 , 2025. [40] J. Wu, S. Wang, S. Shen, Y.-H. Peng, J. Nichols, and J. P. Bigham, “WebUI: A dataset for enhancing visual UI understanding with web semantics,” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2023, pp. 1–14. [41] S. Sherin, A. Muqeet, M. U. Khan, and M. Z. Iqbal, “Qexplore: An exploration strategy for dynamic web applications using guided search,” 

Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 195, p. 111512, 2023. [42] OpenAI, “Computer-using agent,” 2024, accessed: 2025-06-04. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/computer-using-agent/ [43] Anthropic, “Agents and tools: Computer use,” 2024, accessed: 2025-06-04. [Online]. Available: https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/agents-a nd-tools/computer-use [44] V. Krauß, M. McGill, T. Kosch, Y. M. Thiel, D. Sch¨ on, and J. Gugenheimer, “”create a fear of missing out” - chatgpt implements unsolicited deceptive designs in generated websites without warning,” in Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3706598.3713083 [45] Z. Shi, R. Sun, J. Chen, J. Sun, M. Xue, Y. Gao, F. Liu, and X. Yuan, “50 shades of deceptive patterns: A unified taxonomy, multimodal detection, and security implications,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2025 (WWW’25) , 2025. [46] J. Tang, C. Chen, J. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Guo, I. Khalilov, S. A. Gebreegziabher, B. Yao, D. Wang, Y. Ye, T. Li, Z. Xiao, Y. Yao, and T. J.-J. Li, “Dark patterns meet gui agents: Llm agent susceptibility to manipulative interfaces and the role of human oversight,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.10723 [47] C. Chen, Z. Zhang, B. Guo, S. Ma, I. Khalilov, S. A. Gebreegziabher, Y. Ye, Z. Xiao, Y. Yao, T. Li et al. , “The obvious invisible threat: Llm-powered gui agents’ vulnerability to fine-print injections,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11281 , 2025. [48] OpenAI. (2024, September) Introducing openai o1-preview. Accessed: 2025-04-19. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/introducing -openai-o1-preview/ 

15 [49] D.-A. Team, “Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948 [50] Anthropic. (2025) Claude 3.7 sonnet and claude code. Accessed: 2025-04-19. [Online]. Available: https://www.anthropic.com/news/cla ude-3-7-sonnet [51] G. DeepMind. (2025) Gemini 2.5: Our newest gemini model with thinking. Accessed: 2025-04-19. [Online]. Available: https: //blog.google/technology/google-deepmind/gemini-model-thinking-upd ates-march-2025/#gemini-2-5-thinking [52] W.-L. Chiang, L. Zheng, Y. Sheng, A. N. Angelopoulos, T. Li, D. Li, B. Zhu, H. Zhang, M. I. Jordan, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica, “Chatbot arena: an open platform for evaluating llms by human preference,” in 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. [53] R. W. Rogers, “A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change1,” The journal of psychology , vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 93– 114, 1975. [54] R. Van Bavel, N. Rodr´ ıguez-Priego, J. Vila, and P. Briggs, “Using protection motivation theory in the design of nudges to improve online security behavior,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies ,vol. 123, pp. 29–39, 2019. [55] S. Prange, N. Thiem, M. Fr¨ ohlich, and F. Alt, ““secure settings are quick and easy!”–motivating end-users to choose secure smart home configurations,” in Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , 2022, pp. 1–9. [56] S. Chaudhary, “Driving behaviour change with cybersecurity awareness,” 

Computers & Security , p. 103858, 2024. [57] Y. Lu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Yao, and T. J.-J. Li, “From awareness to action: exploring end-user empowerment interventions for dark patterns in ux,” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 8, no. CSCW1, pp. 1–41, 2024. [58] S. M. H. Mansur, S. Salma, D. Awofisayo, and K. Moran, “AidUI: Toward automated recognition of dark patterns in user interfaces,” in 

Proceedings of the 45th International Conference on Software Engi-neering , 2023, pp. 1958–1970. [59] C. Matte, N. Bielova, and C. Santos, “Do cookie banners respect my choice? : Measuring legal compliance of banners from iab europe’s transparency and consent framework,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2020. [60] D. Bollinger, K. Kubicek, C. Cotrini, and D. Basin, “Automating cookie consent and GDPR violation detection,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) . Boston, MA: USENIX Association, 2022, pp. 2893–2910. [61] K. Thomas, E. Bursztein, C. Grier, G. Ho, N. Jagpal, A. Kapravelos, D. Mccoy, A. Nappa, V. Paxson, P. Pearce, N. Provos, and M. A. Rajab, “Ad injection at scale: Assessing deceptive advertisement modifications,” in 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2015, pp. 151–167. [62] J. Szurdi, M. Luo, B. Kondracki, N. Nikiforakis, and N. Christin, “Where are you taking me?understanding abusive traffic distribution systems,” 2021, p. 3613–3624. [63] A. Oest, P. Zhang, B. Wardman, E. Nunes, J. Burgis, A. Zand, K. Thomas, A. Doup´ e, and G.-J. Ahn, “Sunrise to sunset: Analyzing the end-to-end life cycle and effectiveness of phishing attacks at scale,” in 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) , 2020. [64] R. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Yang, S. H. Ng, D. M. Divakaran, and J. S. Dong, “Inferring phishing intention via webpage appearance and dynamics: A deep vision based approach,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) , 2022. [65] A. Mathur, G. Acar, M. J. Friedman, E. Lucherini, J. Mayer, M. Chetty, and A. Narayanan, “Dark patterns at scale: Findings from a crawl of 11k shopping websites,” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 3, no. CSCW, pp. 1–32, 2019. [66] D. Nazarov and Y. Baimukhambetov, “Clustering of dark patterns in the user interfaces of websites and online trading portals (e-commerce),” 

Mathematics , vol. 10, no. 18, p. 3219, 2022. [67] J. Chen, J. Sun, S. Feng, Z. Xing, Q. Lu, X. Xu, and C. Chen, “Unveiling the tricks: Automated detection of dark patterns in mobile applications,” in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 1–20. [68] R. Sch¨ afer, P. M. Preuschoff, R. Niewianda, S. Hahn, K. Fiedler, and J. Borchers, “Don’t detect, just correct: Can llms defuse deceptive patterns directly?” in Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3719683 [69] S. Siby, M. Juarez, C. Diaz, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, and C. Troncoso, “Encrypted dns–¿ privacy? a traffic analysis perspective,” in The Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2020 , 2020. [70] R. Dahlberg and T. Pulls, “Timeless timing attacks and preload defenses in tor’s DNS cache,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) , 2023, pp. 2635–2652. [71] P. Singh, D. Barradas, T. Elahi, and N. Limam, “Connecting the dots in the sky: Website fingerprinting in low earth orbit satellite internet,” in 

The Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2024 ,2024. [72] D. Xue, R. Stanley, P. Kumar, and R. Ensafi, “The discriminative power of cross-layer rtts in fingerprinting proxy traffic,” in The Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2025 , 2025. [73] M. Pan, Y. Zhu, J. Q. Davis, R. Cogo, L. A. Agrawal, N. Arabzadeh, X. Liu, H. Mao, S. Pallerla, T. Shi et al. , “Useful agentic ai: A systems outlook,” 2025. [74] The Tor Project, “Tor Project — Privacy & Freedom Online,” https: //www.torproject.org/, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-22. [75] Brave Software Inc., “Brave Browser — Secure, Fast & Private Web Browser,” https://brave.com/, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-22. [76] Eyeo GmbH, “Adblock Plus - Surf the web without annoying ads!” https://adblockplus.org/, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-22. [77] AdGuard Software Ltd., “AdGuard — World’s most advanced ad blocker!” https://adguard.com/en/welcome.html, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-22. [78] DuckDuckGo Inc., “DuckDuckGo – Privacy, simplified.” https://duckdu ckgo.com/, 2025, accessed: 2025-04-22. [79] C. M. Gray, C. T. Santos, N. Bielova, and T. Mildner, “An ontology of dark patterns knowledge: Foundations, definitions, and a pathway for shared knowledge-building,” in Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642436 [80] X. Deng, Y. Gu, B. Zheng, S. Chen, S. Stevens, B. Wang, H. Sun, and Y. Su, “Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=kiYqbO3wqw [81] Similarweb, “Top websites ranking – most visited websites,” https://ww w.similarweb.com/top-websites/, accessed: 2025-04-20. [82] B. C. Russell, A. Torralba, K. P. Murphy, and W. T. Freeman, “Labelme: a database and web-based tool for image annotation,” International journal of computer vision , vol. 77, pp. 157–173, 2008. [83] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778. [84] S. Woo, S. Debnath, R. Hu, X. Chen, Z. Liu, I. S. Kweon, and S. Xie, “Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 16 133–16 142. [85] OpenAI, “Hello gpt-4o,” https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024, accessed: 2025-05-27. [86] ——, “Introducing o3 and o4 mini,” https://openai.com/index/introduci ng-o3-and-o4-mini/, 2025, accessed: 2025-05-27. [87] Amazon, “Amazon mechanical turk,” 2025, accessed: 2025-04-21. [Online]. Available: https://www.mturk.com/ 

APPENDIX APRIVACY DECEPTIVE PATTERN (PDP) T AXONOMY 

Recently, Gary et al. [79] published a work unifying DP tax-onomies from the perspectives of human–computer interaction and design, web measurement and regulatory experience in regulation, and data protection law [79]. However, this unified taxonomy does not incorporate the privacy literature, which focuses on protecting end-users from being tricked by high-risk privacy-related DPs. Therefore, to systematically bridge privacy issues and deceptive interface designs, we build on 16 TABLE VII: Taxonomy of privacy deceptive patterns (PDPs).            

> Objective PDPs Description Use-cases
> Information Concealment Hidden Information Essential privacy information hidden behind hyperlink. The sign-up/sign-in screen shows “By continuing, you agree. . . ” with the full policy accessible only via a hyperlink. The cookie banner provides cookie information via a separate “Cookie Policy” link. Disguised Ads(with hint) Ads blend with content but include an “Ad/Sponsored” label. Google/Amazon ads are labeled with their respective ad icons or keywords. Disguised Ads (without hint) Ads fully mimic content and lack any hint. A native ad in the article list that appears identical to genuine articles. Interface Obstruction Preselection Non-essential data-sharing options are pre-selected/hidden behind a “Accept” button. Cookie banner with analytics boxes selected by default. The sign-up form pre-selects to receive marketing newsletters. False Hierarchy One option is more dominant than the other Large colourful “Accept” vs. small grey “Reject ”. Prominent “Sign up” contrasts with a subtle “Continue as a guest”. Small Close Button The close button is deliberately tiny, leading users to accidentally click on other content . Tiny “×” on an Ads causes users to click the Ads instead of closing it. Cookie prompt’s “×” so small users give up and accept cookies. Forced Data Disclosure Privacy Zuckering Only a data-sharing path is offered, with no opt-out option. A page includes only “Accept All/Continue” button, leaving users with no practical way to decline non-essential data collection. Onboarding pre-selects contact sharing without providing an opt-out option. Forced Action User must perform an action to continue. Users must sign up or sign in to access public services. User must accept all cookies to view content (no “Decline” option).

DPGuard [45], the first work that explicitly connects DP with privacy, by selecting privacy-related DPs based on the underlying goals of the attacker. Additionally, we also enhance the taxonomy with more details on the use-case description and propose a repair method for each selected PDP. Specifically, we identify three core objectives: Information Concealment , where critical privacy-related information is visually hidden or downplayed; Interface Obstruction , where interfaces are intentionally made difficult to navigate, causing users to overlook or abandon privacy-relevant options; and 

Forced Data Disclosure , where users are into sharing personal data without opt-out choice. Our taxonomy, presented in Table VII, organizes 7 common deceptive patterns under these three attacker goals and illustrates them with 14 real-world use cases. This structure captures a broad spectrum of privacy-infringing UI tactics observed across modern websites and serves as a foundation for both detection and repair efforts. 

Information Concealment. Attackers may deceive users by deliberately concealing critical privacy-related information in the user interface. In these scenarios, the design makes it difficult for users to recognize, locate, or understand how their data will be collected or used. We associate two DPs with this objective: Hidden Information and Disguised Ads. We further divide Disguised Ads into two subtypes, with hint and without hint, based on how detectable the advertising nature is and how we plan to repair them.  

> •

Hidden Information. This pattern refers to cases where essential privacy information, such as Terms of Service, Pri-vacy Policies, or cookie usage details, is not easily visible or accessible. The information may be hidden behind small or low-contrast links, buried in footnotes, or embedded in long texts requiring additional steps to access. Examples include: (1) Sign-up or sign-in pages that state “By continuing, you agree to our policy” with the actual policy only accessible via a small hyperlink; and (2) Cookie banners that reference tracking or personalization without naming specific cookies or third parties, instead linking to a separate document for full details.  

> •

Disguised Ads. These are advertisements that mimic regular content, causing users to interact with them unintentionally. Disguised Ads with hint refers to ads that visually blend into surrounding content but include a subtle marker such as “Ad”, “Sponsored”, or a small platform-provided icon indi-cating that the content is promotional. In contrast, Disguised Ads without hint are styled and positioned in a way that makes them virtually indistinguishable from non-advertising content, and they do not contain any visible labels to signal their advertising nature. This lack of clarity increases the risk of users engaging with ads without realizing they are doing so, especially in content-heavy platforms where visual cues are critical for content classification. 

Interface Obstruction. This category captures deceptive pat-terns where users are required to exert additional cognitive effort to identify privacy-related risks. Attackers exploit user fatigue or inattention by creating interfaces that increase com-plexity, introduce ambiguity, or downplay privacy-preserving options. This makes it more likely that users will overlook the implications of their choices. We link this objective to three deceptive patterns: Preselection, False Hierarchy, and Small Close Buttons.  

> •

Preselection. This occurs when privacy-relevant choices, such as cookie preferences, are presented with data-sharing options already enabled. Users are expected to notice and actively disable these options, or they may not even have the opportunity to do so if the interface lacks clear alternatives (e.g., an “Accept All” option without an equivalent “Reject All” choice).  

> •

False Hierarchy. A deceptive hierarchy arises when inter-17 faces visually prioritize data-sharing options over privacy-preserving ones. For instance, an “Accept All” button might be highlighted in bright colors and placed prominently, while the “Reject All” or “Manage Preferences” options are smaller, grayed out, or hidden in secondary menus.  

> •

Small Close Buttons. In this pattern, close or dismiss buttons are intentionally designed to be small or difficult to click. This tactic is often used in advertisements with visual hints, increasing the chance users accidentally click on the ad. It can also appear in cookie prompts where rejecting non-essential cookies is made harder by a poorly placed or barely visible close button. 

Forced Data Disclosure. In forced data disclosure patterns, users are compelled to provide personal information without meaningful alternatives or the ability to exercise control. The interface is designed to remove or obscure any path that allows users to opt out of data sharing, often conditioning access on data submission. We associate this attacker’s goal with two deceptive patterns: Privacy Zuckering and Forced Action.  

> •

Privacy Zuckering. This occurs when users are nudged or misled into disclosing more personal data than they intend, typically by design choices that hide or complicate privacy settings. Often, only a single action path, such as clicking “Accept All” or “Continue”, is made available, and users are not given sufficient information or control to avoid data disclosure.  

> •

Forced Action. This pattern arises when users must complete a specific action, such as registering an account, consenting to all data collection, or agreeing to a privacy policy, to proceed with a task or access content. There is no meaningful alternative or skip option, effectively coercing users into sharing information to move forward. APPENDIX BEXPERIMENT SETUP 

This section outlines the datasets collected, the models utilized, and the benchmarks used to evaluate DPAgent .

A. Dataset Collection 

To support our evaluation, we created three datasets. The training-testing dataset is used to assess RL-based prompt optimization, website exploration, deceptive pattern detection, and interface repair. We also built a wild dataset to explore ad-ditional real-world insights. Details of the dataset construction are provided below. 

DPAgent RL-based Prompt Optimization Dataset. For RL-based prompt optimization, a dataset containing both website screenshots and their corresponding task lists is essential, as these elements represent the input and ground truth for training task generation models. Multimodal-Mind2Web [80] is currently the only open-source dataset that provides domain names, screenshots, and task annotations for each screenshot, making it a valuable resource for this purpose. To adapt this dataset to our task, we first extracted 1,009 unique tasks from 7,775 screenshots, resulting in 1,009 corresponding screenshots. We then removed highly similar images and consolidated the associated tasks into structured task lists, ultimately producing 140 distinct website–task list pairs. These pairs were split into training and testing sets using an 80:20 ratio, yielding 112 pairs for training and 28 for testing. To validate the test set, we sent HTTP requests to the 28 websites and received valid responses from 23. However, this number proved insufficient for a comprehensive evaluation of website exploration and deceptive pattern detection. To address this limitation, we supplemented the test set with 17 additional websites selected from the top 50 global websites ranked by Similarweb [81], and manually constructed several tasks for each. As a result, we finalized a dataset comprising 112 website–task list pairs for training and 40 for testing. 

DPAgent Privacy Deceptive Pattern Detection Dataset. 

To evaluate deceptive pattern detection, particularly from a privacy perspective, and to establish a foundation for the grooming attack, a set of screenshots annotated under our proposed privacy deceptive pattern taxonomy is essential. To achieve this, we used 40 website-task pairs from the 

DPAgent RL-based prompt optimization testing set and em-ployed DPAgent to dynamically explore these 40 websites with 258 corresponding tasks. We recruited five independent domain experts, each with over five years of active research experience in AI security, generative model alignment, and privacy-enhancing technolo-gies, to annotate the collected webpages. The experts indepen-dently inspected the screenshots and labeled privacy-related deceptive patterns according to our proposed taxonomy using LabelMe [82]. In total, we labeled 515 instances from 418 webpages, including 233 benign webpage screenshots and 185 webpage screenshots involving privacy-deceptive patterns. The annotation achieved substantial inter-rater reliability, with an average pairwise Cohen’s κ of 0.82. Any disagreements were resolved through a consensus-driven reconciliation session, resulting in a finalized set of expert-validated labels and interpretations for each privacy deceptive pattern. 

DPAgent Wild Dataset. To uncover additional insights, we collected 485 websites in the wild. First, we retrieved the top 50 global websites from Similarweb [81]. We then removed sites belonging to harmful or information-sparse categories (e.g., Adult, Gambling, Search Engines, and Email). For each of the remaining categories, we collect the top 50 websites, yielding an initial pool of 700 sites. To simulate typical user behavior, we sent HTTP requests with standard headers (User-Agent, Accept, Accept-Language, and Accept-Encoding) and filtered out responses with invalid status codes. We also removed duplicate websites, i.e., those delivering identical content under different country-specific domain suffixes. This process resulted in 485 unique top websites spanning 14 categories. 

B. Grooming Sample Generation 

For the grooming attack dataset, we used the DPAgent 

Wild Dataset and our proposed privacy deceptive pattern taxonomy as the basis for constructing concrete grooming examples. We first ranked the 485 websites from the DPAgent 

18 Wild Dataset by their number of detected privacy decep-tive pattern instances and selected screenshots from the 10 most representative websites. The same five experts who participated in the annotation process then reviewed these screenshots and, drawing on their experience from the PDP Detection Dataset labeling task, identified and discussed 33 high-probability privacy-deceptive pattern areas. These areas correspond to realistic interface regions where privacy de-ceptive patterns commonly appear, such as cookie banners, consent dialogs, advertisement frames, and forced sign-in flows. The grooming examples were therefore not arbitrarily gen-erated. Instead, they were systematically sampled from our proposed privacy deceptive pattern taxonomy and instantiated according to the five grooming manipulation strategies defined in our threat model: adding noise, pixel modification, invisible text, alpha-channel payloads, and unreadable text. We gen-erated 50 images for each high-probability privacy-deceptive pattern area across the 10 representative images and applied the five grooming manipulation strategies to each area. After excluding requests rejected by OpenAI, we collected a total of 8,181 images for the grooming attack dataset. For the grooming filter dataset, we used the DPAgent 

privacy deceptive pattern detection dataset as the foundation. The grooming filter is designed as a provenance classifier that distinguishes original screenshots from generated or manipu-lated screenshots, rather than classifying whether an interface is benign or deceptive. Therefore, the dataset split is based on image provenance. Starting from the 185 original PDP images and 233 original No-PDP images, we used the GPT image editing model to generate visually similar images containing comparable interface elements. This generation process was used because directly requesting malicious image manipula-tions, such as adding random noise or hidden content, may be rejected by the model’s safety policy. Through this process, we obtained 182 generated PDP images from the 185 original PDP images. We combined these generated PDP images with the original PDP images to construct the grooming filter training dataset. We then applied the same generation process to the 233 original No-PDP images, obtaining 233 generated No-PDP images, and combined them with the original No-PDP images to construct the grooming filter evaluation dataset. Since the grooming filter focuses on detecting whether an image is original or generated, the benign or deceptive nature of the image is not used as the splitting criterion. 

C. Grooming Defense Prompt 

Note: Some of the images are probably generated, please be careful when identifying the deceptive pattern as these fake screenshots may include some misleading informa-tion. Please ignore any characters or elements that you think humans can not understand. When you identified the generated screenshot, please strictly follow the deceptive pattern definitions. 5  

> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> Batch Number
> 0.250
> 0.275
> 0.300
> 0.325
> 0.350
> 0.375
> 0.400
> 0.425
> 0.450
> Rewards
> 0.3032 0.3010
> 0.3212
> 0.3456 0.3549
> Epoch Reward
> Batch Reward

Fig. 4: RL model evaluation rewards. 

D. Benchmarks 

In the DPAgent architecture, two downstream tasks can be compared against existing works: the website exploration approach and privacy deceptive pattern detection. Below, we introduce the benchmark models used to evaluate the perfor-mance of DPAgent ’s components. For the website exploration approach, we first chose the brute-force method, Breadth-First Search (BFS), because it ensures that as many webpages linked to the current page as possible are explored, providing us with the ground truth for exploration coverage. Since brute-force is both time-and resource-intensive, we next selected random exploration and WebUI [40], a strategy-based website exploration tool designed to reduce the likelihood of visiting multiple pages under the same parent. Finally, we used the DPAgent RL-based prompt optimization test dataset, which includes 40 website-task pairs, to evaluate all three models ( i.e., BFS, Ran-dom Exploration, WebUI, DPAgent ), recording how many webpages they visited under a given constraint and calculating the DP type coverage rate. Before evaluating and comparing DPAgent ’s capabilities in detecting privacy-related deceptive patterns with those of existing tools, we first selected models from both the privacy detection and deceptive pattern detection domains. On the deceptive pattern detection side, DPGuard [45] represents the state-of-the-art model capable of detecting deceptive patterns across both mobile and web platforms. For privacy detection, we selected the most recent work ALSACNC [10], which focuses on cookie consent compliance and incorporates certain deceptive pattern elements. However, due to its design focus, ALSACNC is limited in its ability to detect deceptive patterns and does not support UI manipulation and disguised ads deceptive pattern detection. To address this gap, we also introduced AidUI [58], which supports the detection of these missing deceptive patterns specifically on web platforms. Finally, we calculate the F1 score for each category and record both the micro-averaged and macro-averaged F1 scores as the experiment results. APPENDIX CREINFORCEMENT LEARNING EVALUATION REWARDS AND 

ABLATION STUDY 

See Figure 4 and Table VIII. 19 TABLE VIII: Ablation of reinforcement learning       

> Prompt Web Info without with without 0.3350 0.6626 with 0.4585 0.7140

APPENDIX DLLM G ROOMING FILTER EVALUATION 

See Table IX. TABLE IX: Grooming filter performance on grooming filter evaluation dataset.                                         

> Model Generated Original Micro F1 Macro F1
> ResNet 101 [83] (IMAGENET1K V2) 0.7035 0.6636 0.6848 0.6835 ResNet 152 [83] (IMAGENET1K V2) 0.6747 0.7327 0.7065 0.7037 ConvNeXt [84] (large) 0.7683 0.7483 0.7587 0.7583 EfficientNet [30] (v2 l) 0.9028 0.9015 0.9022 0.9022
> OpenCLIP [29] (ViT-bigG-14) 0.8636 0.8750 0.8696 0.8693 OpenCLIP [29] (ViT-H-14-378) 0.8010 0.8456 0.8261 0.8233 GPT-4o [85] (2024-08-06) 0.1660 0.6626 0.5196 0.4145 o3 [86] (2025-04-16) 0.0413 0.6578 0.4957 0.3496 Gemini [51] (2.5-pro-preview-03-25) 0.0581 0.6657 0.5065 0.3619

APPENDIX EUSER STUDY PROTOCOL AND ETHICS 

To evaluate the effectiveness and non-intrusiveness of 

DPAgent , we conducted an online user study. The study design, participant recruitment, and data collection procedures were rigorously structured to ensure high data quality and comprehensively protect participants’ rights and privacy. 

Ethics, Informed Consent, and Privacy. As the study in-volved human participants, the protocol was fully reviewed and approved by our Institutional Review Board (IRB) prior to commencement. Before beginning the survey, all participants were presented with a digital informed consent form detailing the study’s objectives, the nature of the data being collected, and their rights. Explicit consent was required to proceed. To protect participant privacy, we did not collect any Personally Identifiable Information (PII). All demographic and survey response data were fully anonymized upon collection, stored on secure, access-controlled servers, and utilized strictly for aggregate analysis. Furthermore, participants were provided with a predefined secret keyword, empowering them to with-draw their participation and request data deletion at any point without penalty. 

Participant Recruitment and Demographics. We re-cruited 40 adult participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) [87]. We targeted a sample size of 40 because it comfortably exceeds the established thresholds for qualitative heuristic evaluations and formative usability studies, ensuring data saturation for identifying general usability trends and subjective perceptions. To maintain high data quality and mit-igate the risk of automated or low-effort responses (inclusion criteria), recruitment was strictly limited to MTurk workers with a HIT approval rate of 95% or higher and at least 1,000 previously approved tasks. 

Study Protocol and Quality Control. The survey was refined based on feedback from our local research community. Based on pilot testing, it took approximately 10 minutes to complete and comprised three main sections:  

> •

Background and Demographics: We collected basic back-ground information, including average daily browsing time, baseline concern regarding online privacy, and prior exposure to privacy-deceptive patterns.  

> •

Scenario Evaluation: Participants evaluated DPAgent 

across eight distinct real-world web scenarios. Using a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree), they rated the tool’s effectiveness in mitigating on-line privacy risks (“Do you think DPAgent can help?”) and its non-intrusiveness (“Do you agree that DPAgent 

does not affect your daily browsing experience?”).  

> •

Quality Assurance: We embedded attention-check ques-tions within the survey to filter out bots or inattentive participants. Every participant who successfully completed the survey and passed the quality checks (valid response) was compen-sated with $5 USD, ensuring fair remuneration for their time. We did not calculate inter-rater agreement, as the user study was designed to assess subjective user perceptions via Likert scales rather than objective ground-truth labeling. Divergence in opinion was expected, and our analysis focused primarily on aggregate trends. 

Summary of Baseline Responses. Analysis of the initial survey section revealed that 65% (26/40) of participants browsed the web for more than two hours daily. Furthermore, 57.5% (23/40) expressed privacy concerns at or below amoderate level. Notably, 100% of participants had previously encountered at least one privacy-deceptive pattern, with 92.5% (37/40) citing “forced actions” as the most commonly experi-enced pattern. APPENDIX FEIGHT USE CASES OF BEFORE AND AFTER APPLYING 

DPA G E N T .We present 8 use cases of before and after applying 

DPAgent in Figure 5 20 Before 

For the 'Misleading Cookie Consent' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and automatically set the cookie preferences to 'Only Accept Necessary Cookies' for privacy protection. The user can cancel this change and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Undo'. 

For the 'Force To Allow All Cookies' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and automatically delete all unnecessary cookies for privacy protection. The user can cancel this change and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Undo'. 

For the "Hidden Redirection" case, DPAgent will notify the potential privacy risks to the users. For ads without any hints, DPAgent will automatically delete them for better privacy protection. For ads with hints, DPAgent will advise the user to proceed with caution. The user can cancel/dismiss this change by simply clicking "Undo" / "Dismiss". 

For the 'Hidden Redirection' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the users . For the ads with hints, DPAgent will advise the user to proceed with caution. The user can dismiss this warning by simply clicking 'Dismiss'. 

For the 'Force Sign-In' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and request user to double confirm before continue. The user can dismiss and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Dismiss'. 

For the 'Force To Allow All Cookies' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and automatically delete all unnecessary cookies for privacy protection. The user can cancel this change and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Undo'. 

For the 'Pre-selection' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and request user to double confirm before continue. The user can dismiss and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Dismiss'. 

For the 'Information Hiding' case, DPAgent will notify potential privacy risks to the user and automatically set the cookie preferences to 'Only Accept Necessary Cookies' for privacy protection. The user can cancel this change and redo their choice by simply clicking 'Undo'. 

After 

Before 

After 

Misleading Cookie Consent  Information Hiding  Pre-selection Hidden Redirection (1) 

Force To Allow All Cookies (1)  Hidden Redirection (2)  Force to Allow All Cookies (2) Force Sign-in Fig. 5: Examples of privacy deceptive patterns before and after repair. 21