Title: Federated Temporal Attention Intelligence for Cyber-Resilient IoMT: Lightweight Digital Twins and PPO-Driven Honeypot Deception

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21422v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:05:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
# Federated Temporal Attention Intelligence for Cyber-Resilient IoMT: Lightweight Digital Twins and PPO-Driven Honeypot Deception 

Syed Zeeshan Haider a, Anwar Shah a, ∗, Muneeb Arif a, Hamza Iftikhar a,Waqas Ali a

> aFAST National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan

Abstract 

The rapid proliferation of Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) devices intro-duces critical cybersecurity vulnerabilities in healthcare environments where resource-constrained medical devices operate under strict latency require-ments and stringent data-privacy regulations. This paper presents the Lightweight Digital Twin and Federated Reinforcement Learning (LDT-FRL) framework, a privacy-preserving defense architecture integrating four complementary mechanisms: a Temporal Attention Encoder (TAE) built on a GRU back-bone with learned temporal self-attention for flow-level threat classification; lightweight LSTM-based Digital Twins trained on normal-class traffic to generate per-device anomaly scores that gate the TAE classifier through a learned sigmoid coupling; a Federated Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) agent selecting among ALLOW, ISOLATE, and HONEYPOT_REDIRECT actions based on a seven-dimensional state capturing classifier confidence, entropy, anomaly magnitude, and traffic composition; and an intelligent hon-eypot layer that converts redirected suspicious traffic into actionable threat intelligence. A federated aggregation strategy is employed, using exponen-tial moving average (EMA)-smoothed per-client validation losses as inverse-weighted FedAvg coefficients. The purpose of this strategy is a stabilization of global model updates under non-IID client distributions. An evaluation         

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: zeeshan.haider.syed1010@gmail.com (Syed Zeeshan Haider),
> anwar.shah@nu.edu.pk (Anwar Shah), muneebrajpoot9797@gmail.com (Muneeb Arif),
> hamzaiftikharbhatti@gmail.com (Hamza Iftikhar), waqas.ali@nu.edu.pk (Waqas Ali)
> arXiv:2606.21422v1 [cs.LG] 19 Jun 2026

on CICDDoS 2019 (431,371 raw records, 215,674 temporal windows, 61 fea-tures, 16 attack classes), shows that the framework achieves 99.66% test accuracy together with a macro-F1 score of 0.9913 by a federated round 9. This represents a convergence that is 81% faster than the DTFL-CD base-line while matching its minimum CPU utilisation of 44% against that same baseline. A second evaluation on TON-IoT (211,043 raw records, 70,335 win-dows, 16 features, 10 classes including the heavily imbalanced mitm category with only 1,043 raw records), yields a 99.95% test accuracy and a macro-F1 of 0.9995 by round 10; the best-saved checkpoint at round 8 attains a validation macro-F1 score of 0.9998, which outperforms a Fed-Inforce-Fusion baseline by 0.55 percentage points while covering three additional attack categories. All ten TON-IoT classes individually achieve F1 ≥ 0.9989, including perfect F1 = 1.000 for mitm despite its severe under-representation. Across both datasets, the honeypot systems accumulated 1,053 verified attack captures (CICDDoS 2019) and 1,009 verified attack captures (TON-IoT) over ten fed-erated rounds, achieving average precision of 0.514 and 0.486 respectively. EMA aggregation weights remained stable in the range of 0.328 to 0.339 on CICDDoS 2019, avoiding the oscillations that arise with raw-loss inverse weighting. An explainability analysis employing SHAP, LIME, a Grad-CAM method, and a counterfactual approach confirms that a Temporal Attention Engine (TAE) focuses on a set of semantically meaningful flow features. Such a focus provides an interpretable piece of evidence for each individual defense decision. 

Keywords: Internet of Medical Things, Digital Twins, Federated Learning, Graph Convolutional Networks, Advantage Actor-Critic, Honeypot Defense, Cyber Resilience, Edge Computing, Intrusion Detection, Non-IID Federated Aggregation, CICDDoS 2019, TON-IoT 

1. Introduction 

THE Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) is one of the most impactful paradigm shifts in modern healthcare, enabling implantable cardiac monitors, smart insulin pumps, connected infusion systems, and continuous vital-sign monitors, along with wearables and hospital-grade diagnostic equipment, to operate as a unified networked fabric [1, 2]. Market analysts project more than 5.8 billion active IoMT endpoints worldwide by 2025 [3]. The efficiencies enabled by IoMT could yield up to $300 billion in healthcare cost savings [3]. 2Yet this same connectivity exposes patients to adversaries who may intercept sensitive data, interfere with clinical care, steal protected health information, or alter device operation in ways that directly threaten life. The security problem in the IoMT is not merely a technical one, it is fundamentally an architectural challenge. Medical devices were historically designed with a security concern treated as a secondary priority. A typical IoMT endpoint operates on a processor with only 64–512 MB of working memory. It consumes just a few milliwatts of power. At the same time, it must deliver a deterministic real-time response — all within a 100–500 MHz computational budget [4]. These constraints place a sharp limit on both a cryptographic load and a computational load that any such device can sus-tain. A regulatory dimension adds further complexity. In the United States, a set of strict regulatory frameworks such as the HIPAA Privacy and Se-curity Rules governs the data generated by these devices. In the European Union, a set of analogous requirements is imposed by the GDPR [5]. When resource scarcity and regulatory constraints are combined, a security envi-ronment emerges where a standard enterprise intrusion detection technology is rendered ill-suited for a direct deployment. The attacks that target IoMT deployments have grown increasingly so-phisticated. A false data injection attack corrupts sensor readings, poten-tially causing a treatment system to deliver an incorrect dosage or to miss a critical intervention. A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack floods a network segment, thereby severing a communication link between a monitor-ing system and a clinical staff member. A man-in-the-middle attack silently intercepts a data stream between a device and its management system. Aransomware attack has proven to be particularly damaging in the medical sector: a 2020 attack on the Düsseldorf University Hospital illustrates how a cyber threat can directly endanger a patient [6]. A hospital management in-terface is continuously scanned and password-sprayed in a pursuit of a deeper network penetration. A conventional intrusion detection system addresses these threats inade-quately in several respects. A signature-based system is reactive and detects only a set of previously catalogued attacks, requiring a constant manual rule update and remaining blind to a novel variant [7]. A centralised ma-chine learning approach introduces a round-trip latency of 60–120 ms in a bandwidth-constrained clinical network, which is incompatible with a real-time response requirement of a life-critical device [8], and a spanning of net-work boundaries conflicts directly with a data-residency requirement of the 3HIPAA and the GDPR [9]. Even a cloud-adjacent fog deployment that trans-mits a raw device data off-premises presents a legal challenge in many of the healthcare jurisdictions. A convergence of several complementary technologies offers a compelling path toward an addressing of these constraints simultaneously. A Digital Twin (DT) is a lightweight, continuously synchronised virtual replica of a physical device that is capable of detecting a behavioural anomaly through a prediction-error analysis rather than a raw-data inspection [1, 3]. A federated learning approach distributes a training process across a set of participating institutions while keeping an individual patient data local to the originat-ing device, thereby enabling a collaborative model improvement without a transmission of sensitive information [10, 5]. A reinforcement learning tech-nique, specifically a Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [12], equips a de-fense agent with an adaptive response policy that improves continuously as a threat landscape evolves [11]. A Temporal Attention Encoder augments a GRU sequence model with a learned temporal attention mechanism, extract-ing a set of discriminative features from an ordered window of network flow statistics and capturing a temporal signature that differentiates an attack class. A honeypot system has evolved from a passive observation trap into an active threat intelligence engine that simultaneously deflects an attacker away from a production resource and harvests a forensic data on a novel attack technique [13]. A significant body of recent work has applied a combination of these technologies to an IoMT security context. A study by Popoola et al. [31] demonstrated a zero-day botnet detection in a federated setting but required 92 to 100 communication rounds per a single experiment, a number that is impractical for a hospital requiring a model update within minutes of a new campaign’s emergence. A work by Naeem et al. [32] introduced a semi-supervised active learning approach that demanded more than 100,000 local epochs, a compute budget that is entirely unavailable on a clinical edge hardware. The DTFL-CD system [27] combined Digital Twins with federated learning and achieved F1 scores of 0.98 on CICDDoS 2019, but required 48 aggregation rounds with CPU utilisation swings between 44% and 71%, and offered no adaptive response mechanism beyond raising an alert. The closest prior integrated work, Fed-Inforce-Fusion [28], combined federated learning with Q-learning-based reinforcement for IoMT intrusion detection, achieving 99.40% accuracy on TON-IoT across seven attack classes. Yet Q-learning’s tabular value function does not scale to continuous state spaces, the 4system incorporates no Digital Twin monitoring, and there is no honeypot integration to convert detections into actionable threat intelligence. Most fundamentally, none of these systems treats cyber resilience as a first-class design objective: they measure detection accuracy in isolation but do not specify how the system maintains clinical continuity during an active attack or recovers after containment. To address these compounded limitations, this paper proposes the Lightweight Digital Twin and Federated Reinforcement Learning (LDT-FRL) 

framework, a unified, privacy-preserving security architecture designed from the ground up for cyber-resilient IoMT deployments. LDT-FRL integrates four tightly coupled components: lightweight LSTM-based Digital Twins trained on normal-class traffic to produce per-device anomaly scores; a Tem-poral Attention Encoder (TAE) whose GRU-based classifier is directly gated by the Digital Twin’s reconstruction error through a learned sigmoid cou-pling; a Federated PPO agent that selects ALLOW, ISOLATE, or HONEY-POT_REDIRECT actions from a seven-dimensional state encoding classifier confidence, anomaly magnitude, and local traffic composition; and an intel-ligent honeypot layer that converts suspicious redirected traffic into forensic threat intelligence. Federated training employs EMA-weighted FedAvg to stabilise global model updates under non-IID client distributions, and the entire system is governed by a four-level graduated degradation strategy that guarantees clinical operational continuity at every threat level. The frame-work is evaluated on CICDDoS 2019 and TON-IoT benchmarks, achieving 99.66% and 99.95% test accuracy respectively, converging in 9–10 federated rounds with strong per-class performance including perfect detection of the severely underrepresented mitm class. The specific contributions of this work are: 

• A novel lightweight LSTM-based Digital Twin that produces per-device anomaly scores, coupled with a GRU-based Temporal Attention Encoder incorporating a learned per-class sigmoid gate whose logits are directly modulated by the Digital Twin’s reconstruction error, reducing false neg-atives against novel attack variants. 

• An EMA smoothing scheme for per-client validation losses used as inverse-weighted FedAvg coefficients, stabilising global model updates under ex-treme non-IID partitioning and achieving convergence in 9–10 federated rounds compared to 48 rounds for prior baselines. 

• A PPO agent with a seven-dimensional state whose HONEYPOT_REDIRECT 5action transforms suspicious traffic into actionable threat intelligence with verified precision. 

• An operational continuity plan guaranteeing no more than 10% service degradation at any threat level, with explicit resource-allocation targets that preserve communication for life-critical devices throughout coordi-nated assaults. 

• Post-hoc interpretability via SHAP, LIME, Grad-CAM, and counterfac-tual explanations, providing feature-level and temporal evidence for each classification and response decision in support of regulatory accountability in clinical deployments. This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 surveys related work. Sec-tion 3 presents the problem formulation. Section 4 describes the LDT-FRL architecture and algorithmic procedure. Section 5 presents experimental re-sults and comparative evaluation. Section 6 analyses cyber resilience prop-erties and privacy guarantees. Section 7 presents explainability analysis. Section 8 concludes and outlines future directions. 

2. Related Work 

This section describes the six technology domains that constitute the design space of LDT-FRL, identifying shortcomings of existing approaches that motivate our design choices. 

2.1. Digital Twins for IoT and Healthcare Security 

The concept of a Digital Twin, a continuously synchronised virtual model of a physical entity, was originally proposed for an industrial manufacturing context but has since been adapted broadly for a networked systems security purpose. A foundational survey of security threats specific to DT environ-ments was conducted by Alcaraz and López [1], who catalogued a synchroni-sation latency attack, a twin state poisoning, and a data-integrity violation as the primary vectors. A synchronisation-latency anomaly is identified by them as a primary indicator of a man-in-the-middle interception in a DT environment, a finding that motivates a use of a reconstruction error as an anomaly signal in our design. In the IoT domain, a taxonomy of DT applications for wireless systems was proposed by Khan et al. [3], with a partitioning of uses into a design validation category, a predictive maintenance category, and a security sim-ulation category. An observation made by them is that a primary obstacle 6to a DT deployment on a resource-constrained IoT hardware is a memory footprint of the twin model itself, an issue that they addressed by offloading a twin computation to an edge gateway. Our Digital Twin design follows this prescription: a twin inference executes on an edge gateway rather than on a medical device, thereby keeping a device-side overhead to a cost of transmitting a compressed state update. For the healthcare setting, a federated DT architecture for smart hospitals was proposed by Qureshi et al. [14], which separates a device behaviour model learning from a patient identifier collection. A demonstration from their work shows that a reconstruction-based anomaly detection achieves a 93% detection rate of a ransomware precursor with a false positive rate below 2%. An extension of this line of work was performed by Chen et al. [15], who incorporated a blockchain-based attestation into a DT synchronisation for a medical device authentication, achieving a 99.2% authentication accuracy at a latency of 1.5 ms. A collective implication of these studies is a motivation of reconstruction-error-based Digital Twins as a first-line anomaly signal. However, none of these studies couples a DT output directly into a classifier inference pathway as a learned gate, a design choice that is introduced in LDT-FRL. 

2.2. Federated Learning for Privacy-Preserving IoMT Security 

A federated learning approach was formalised by McMahan et al. [10] as FedAvg, and it has since become a dominant paradigm for a privacy-preserving collaborative learning. A core guarantee of this approach, that a raw data never leaves an originating device, maps directly onto a healthcare data-residency requirement. A survey of FL applications in healthcare was conducted by Mothukuri et al. [5], who identified three fundamental challenges: a statistical heterogene-ity across participating institutions (a non-IID problem), a communication efficiency in bandwidth-constrained clinical networks, and a vulnerability to model-poisoning attacks. A statistical heterogeneity is particularly acute in a healthcare setting: an intensive care unit generates predominantly a mon-itoring traffic, whereas an emergency department sees a high-volume device configuration exchange. A development by Li et al. [16] produced FedHealth 2.0, which addresses a statistical heterogeneity through an adaptive per-client weighting and achieves a 94.3% accuracy in a health monitoring task. An application of transfer 7learning within a federated framework to an IIoT intrusion detection was per-formed by Zhang et al. [8], achieving a 95.97% accuracy, although a shared cloud-server aggregation introduces an 85–120 ms round-trip latency that is unsuitable for a time-critical medical application. A federated IDS for a healthcare IoT was proposed by Singh et al. [9], achieving a 98.2% accuracy on a NSL-KDD dataset, though that particular dataset lacks a contemporary attack vector relevant to an IoMT threat landscape. A method called SCAFFOLD [17] addresses a client drift in non-IID set-tings through a use of control variates that correct a local gradient update direction, thereby reducing a communication round by up to 50% when com-pared to FedAvg on a set of heterogeneous benchmarks. Our EMA weighting methodology approaches the same problem from a different angle: instead of modifying a gradient update rule, it smooths an aggregation coefficient across a set of rounds so that a single high-loss round cannot propagate a drastically different weight into a global model. This objective can be achieved with a minimal additional implementation complexity and without any extra communication overhead. A demonstration by Nguyen et al. [18] showed that an adaptive client selection can achieve a federated IDS convergence while minimizing a total byte transmitted, with only a 40% accuracy drop. A cosine annealing of a local learning rate per a federated round is applied by us: a larger step in an early round enables a rapid convergence, while a smaller step in a later round prevents a destructive local overfitting prior to an aggregation. 

2.3. Attention-Based Temporal Sequence Modelling for Network Intrusion Detection 

A shift in network intrusion detection has occurred over time, moving from a handcrafted feature extractor toward an end-to-end deep learning model that processes a traffic sequence directly. A recurrent architecture — particularly a GRU or an LSTM, has established a strong benchmark by exploiting a sequential nature of a network flow [19]. More recently, a recurrent backbone has been augmented with an attention mechanism that enables a model to focus on a most discriminative timestep. A finding by Zhao et al. [20] showed that a GRU network with a multi-head temporal attention module outperforms a plain GRU by a substantial margin, demonstrating that an attention mechanism concentrates on a sub-second DDoS attack burst that stands out clearly against a baseline traffic. 8An application of a similar GRU-attention structure to an IoT traffic clas-sification on the TON-IoT benchmark was performed by Ullah et al. [21], achieving a 99.1% accuracy across nine classes, although without a Digital Twin anomaly gating or a federated training. An investigation of attention-based classifiers in a federated environment for an IoT security was conducted by Li et al. [11], who concluded that an EMA-weighted FedAvg leads to a more stable aggregation of an attention layer than a uniform FedAvg un-der a heterogeneous client distribution, a finding that directly motivates our aggregation design. A distinction should be noted: while this work employs a Temporal Atten-tion Encoder, it differs from a graph neural network approach. A GNN-based temporal model [22] requires an explicit graph topology with a per-device node and a per-flow edge that can only be recovered from a raw packet cap-ture (PCAP) where a source and a destination IP address are preserved. The CICDDoS 2019 and TON-IoT datasets consist of a pre-computed flow-level statistical feature that is generated by CICFlowMeter, from which an IP identifier and a port identifier are removed during a feature extraction pro-cess. A construction of a meaningful device communication graph from these feature vectors is therefore not possible without a reprocessing of the original PCAPs, making a TAE the most suitable architecture for these benchmarks. 

2.4. Honeypot Systems and Deception-Based Defense 

A distinctive position in cybersecurity is occupied by a honeypot, which actively engages an attacker, consumes an attacker resource, and collects a high-fidelity piece of intelligence about an attack tool, a technique, and a procedure. A systematic review of 47 honeypot deployments was conducted by Nawrocki et al. [7], quantifying that a high-interaction honeypot cap-tures, on an average, 3.2× more sophisticated attacks than a low-interaction alternative. In an IoT context, an additional challenge is faced by a honeypot: the emulation of a specific protocol stack and a firmware behaviour of a medical device. A high-interaction honeypot called IoT-POT was developed by Genç et al. [23], which is capable of emulating 12 device types and collected over 4,700 attacks over a 30-day deployment period. An adaptive medical device honeypot was proposed by Huang et al. [13], which adjusts its emulated vul-nerability profile based on an attacker probing behaviour, thereby increasing a dwell time from 4.2 minutes for a static honeypot to over 18 minutes for an adaptive implementation. A direct integration of a honeypot management 9with a deep Q-learning was performed by Kumar et al. [24], allowing an RL agent to decide in a real time whether to redirect a suspicious traffic to a honeypot or to isolate it outright, with a 47% improvement in an attacker engagement time being achieved. Our honeypot design is informed by this RL-integration paradigm. When a PPO agent selects a HONEYPOT_REDIRECT action based on a seven-dimensional state vector that incorporates a TAE’s classification confidence together with a Digital Twin’s anomaly score, a redirect decision becomes substantially more precise than a random policy or a threshold-based policy. 

2.5. Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Network Defense 

A natural fit for a network defense is provided by RL, owing to an align-ment between a problem structure and an RL formalism: an agent observes a partial view of a system state, selects from a finite action set, and receives a reward signal that is optimised for a security goal. A survey of 124 deep RL applications to a cybersecurity domain was conducted by Nguyen and Reddi [25], who noted that an intrusion response is an area where RL shows a clearest superiority over a set of baselines, with a reported gain of 15–30% in a dynamic threat environment. Policy gradient methods, and in particular PPO [12], have proven to be effective for a safety-critical network defense setting. A clipped surrogate objective bounds a ratio of a new policy probability to an old policy prob-ability. This prevents a catastrophic policy change that would temporarily block a valid traffic. Zhou et al. [26] applied PPO to a DDoS mitigation task in an IoT network, achieving a 96.3% mitigation effectiveness while forward-ing 94.1% of a legitimate traffic. Li et al. [11] extended PPO to federated PPO systems in industrial IoT, showing that PPO actor networks can be aggregated with uniform weights, since reward signals are not directly com-parable between clients with non-IID distributions. Our design accordingly aggregates TAE models with EMA-weighted coefficients while aggregating PPO models with uniform weights. 

2.6. Integrated Frameworks for IoMT Security 

Several recent publications have integrated multiple technologies for com-prehensive IoMT protection. Salim et al. [27] proposed DTFL-CD, a feder-ated learning and blockchain-based DT framework with anomaly threshold scoring for early botnet detection in IIoT environments. DTFL-CD achieved F1 scores of 0.98 on CICDDoS 2019 but required 48 federated rounds and 10 44–71% CPU utilisation. Its primary limitation is the absence of an adap-tive response component: upon anomaly detection, it raises an alert and delegates the response decision to human operators, which is impractical for automated clinical settings. The closest prior integrated work to LDT-FRL is Fed-Inforce-Fusion [28], which combined federated learning with Q-learning-based reinforcement for IoMT security, achieving 99.40% accuracy and 98.99% detection rate on TON-IoT across seven attack classes. However, several gaps remain: Q-learning’s discrete tabular value function does not scale gracefully to contin-uous state spaces; the system incorporates no Digital Twin monitoring; and there is no honeypot integration. LDT-FRL addresses each of these gaps directly. 

2.7. Explainability in Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection 

Deploying deep learning models in safety-critical healthcare environments necessitates human-interpretable evidence for model decisions. SHAP [43] provides theoretically grounded feature attributions based on cooperative game theory and has been applied to network traffic classification to identify the flow statistics most predictive of attack behaviour. LIME [44] approxi-mates the local decision boundary of any classifier with a sparse linear model, enabling per-sample explanations without architectural modification. Grad-CAM [45], originally proposed for convolutional networks, can be adapted to GRU-based sequence models by computing gradient-weighted activations over the hidden state sequence, producing temporal saliency maps identifying which timesteps drove a classification. Counterfactual explanation methods [46] identify the minimal feature perturbation required to change a model’s prediction, providing contrastive evidence that is particularly useful for audit-ing false positives and negatives in clinical settings. LDT-FRL incorporates all four methods as a post-deployment explainability layer, operating on the trained TAE without modifying its architecture or inference pipeline. 

3. Problem Formulation 

We consider an IoMT deployment consisting of D heterogeneous medical devices distributed across K geographically separated healthcare facilities, each modelled as an independent federated client. The adversary possesses network access to at least one traffic segment and is capable of launching volumetric flooding, amplification attacks, TCP/UDP exploitation, backdoor 11 establishment, credential brute-forcing, injection attacks, man-in-the-middle interception, ransomware deployment, reconnaissance scanning, and cross-site scripting. The adversary is not assumed to have access to the training process, model parameters, or Digital Twin replicas, but may conduct slow, low-rate attacks designed to evade threshold-based detectors and may adapt tactics over time. The defender’s objective is twofold: classify each time window of network flow statistics into the correct class with high accuracy, and select an appropriate response action in real time without disrupting clinical operations. Network traffic is modelled as a time-ordered sequence of F -dimensional flow-level feature vectors. Given a time-ordered sequence of T flow-level ob-servations {x1, x 2, . . . , x T } with associated class labels ℓi ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , C − 1},sliding windows of width W and step S are constructed as Wp = {xpS , x pS +1 , . . . , x pS +W −1},with each window assigned the majority class of its constituent samples. For each device i, a lightweight Digital Twin Ti trained on normal-class traffic produces a per-device anomaly score at inference time. For consistency with the mean absolute error (MAE) training objective described in Section 4, the anomaly score is defined as: 

ai(t) = 1

F

> F

X

> j=1

x(t) 

> i,j

− ˆx(t) 

> i,j

, (1) providing a complementary signal for detecting novel or stealthy attacks. The Temporal Attention Encoder fθ maps each window to a probability distribu-tion over C classes modulated by ai, from which the PPO response agent ob-serves a seven-dimensional state s = [ pmax , min( H, H max ), min( ai, a max ), 1[ℓ =

cnormal ], n k/n max , r normal , σ probs ] and selects from three actions: ALLOW, ISOLATE, and HONEYPOT_REDIRECT. Federated aggregation employs EMA-smoothed per-client validation losses ℓEMA  

> k

(r) = α ℓ k(r)+(1 −α) ℓEMA  

> k

(r−

1) as inverse weights wk = 1 /(ℓEMA  

> k

(r) + ε) to form the global model θr 

> global

=

PKk=1 (wk/ P 

> j

wj ) θrk, assigning higher weight to clients with lower smoothed validation loss while the ε term prevents numerical instability. 

4. Proposed Framework Architecture 

The LDT-FRL framework is organised into four coordinated layers,Device, Edge, Cloud, and Application,that together provide end-to-end security from individual device monitoring to global threat intelligence. 12 Figure 1: Four-layer LDT-FRL architecture showing Device, Edge, Cloud, and Application layers. The resilience manager overlay in the Edge Layer dynamically reallocates compute between medical processing and security functions across four threat levels (Level 0 to Level 3), ensuring clinical operational continuity at every stage of an active incident. 

The overall architecture of the LDT-FRL framework is shown in Fig-ure 1. The Device Layer contains physical IoMT equipment that transmits encrypted flow statistics to the edge. The Edge Layer hosts the Digital Twins, TAE classifier, PPO response agent, and honeypot system as the primary computational site for real-time threat detection and response. A resilience manager in the Edge Layer continuously monitors the system threat level and dynamically reallocates edge compute between medical data processing and security functions: 70/30 at Level 0 up to 10/90 at Level 3, ensuring life-critical device services remain uninterrupted at every threat level. The Cloud Layer performs EMA-weighted federated aggregation and distributes updated global models back to clients. A role-specific monitoring dashboard is provided by the Application Layer for a clinical staff member and a secu-rity engineer, revealing a per-device anomaly score, a honeypot capture, a PPO action distribution, and a federated training progress. 

4.1. Device Layer 

A physical IoMT endpoint, such as a pacemaker, an infusion pump, a monitoring wearable, or a gateway device, comprises the Device Layer. An encrypted flow-level statistic is sent by each device to an edge gateway via a TLS 1.3 protocol with a certificate-based mutual authentication and a perfect 13 forward secrecy. Raw patient data never leaves the device; only lightweight pre-computed network flow features extracted by an on-device agent are transmitted. This design ensures that even if the entire edge gateway is compromised, reconstruction of individual patient measurements remains in-feasible. 

4.2. Edge Layer: Digital Twin, TAE, PPO, and Honeypot 

The Edge Layer is the primary computational site for real-time threat detection and response, featuring four components per deployed client. 

4.2.1. Lightweight Digital Twin 

Each device i has a corresponding Digital Twin implemented as a single-layer LSTM with 64 hidden units. The twin is trained exclusively on win-dows whose majority label is the normal class, learning the device’s expected temporal traffic pattern under benign conditions. Training minimises mean absolute reconstruction error on the final-step feature vector: 

LDT = 1

F

> F

X

> j=1

|xj − ˆxj | , (2) so that the anomaly score at inference time is on the same scale as the train-ing objective. A lower final loss indicates well-separated normal behaviour; a higher loss reflects greater traffic variability across heterogeneous device types, yet still produces a discriminative anomaly signal that meaningfully separates attack and normal windows at inference time. At inference time, the anomaly score is computed for every incoming window and used both as a PPO state component and as input to the TAE anomaly gate. 

4.2.2. Temporal Attention Encoder 

The TAE is the primary classification component. It processes windows through feature projection and normalisation, GRU encoding, temporal self-attention, and anomaly-gated classification. Formally, let z ∈ RC denote the pre-softmax logit vector produced by the TAE’s classification head, and let ai ∈ R≥0 be the Digital Twin anomaly score for device i. The anomaly gate computes a per-class scaling vector 

g ∈ RC as: 

gc = 1 + σ(wc · ai + bc), c = 1 , . . . , C, (3) 14 where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and wc, b c are learned scalar parameters for each class c. The gated logit vector is then ˜z = g ⊙ z (element-wise product). For the normal class cnormal , the gate is constrained to wcnormal < 0 so that high anomaly scores suppress the normal-class logit, increasing sensitivity to attacks. All other class gates have wc > 0, amplifying attack-class logits under anomalous conditions. When the Digital Twin anomaly score is near zero (normal-like traffic), the gate has negligible effect on the logits. When the anomaly score is large (anomalous traffic), the gate amplifies attack-class logits, increasing classification confidence on the attack side and reducing the likelihood of false negatives on novel attack variants whose flow statistics are ambiguous without the anomaly context. The TAE is trained with cross-entropy loss with label smoothing, AdamW optimiser, and cosine-annealed learning rate per federated round. Class-balanced training is ensured through a WeightedRandomSampler that as-signs sample weights inversely proportional to class frequency in each client’s local partition, providing equal expected exposure for all classes per epoch including heavily underrepresented classes such as mitm .

4.2.3. PPO Response Agent 

The PPO agent is a two-head neural network with shared architecture: an actor network that outputs a categorical distribution over the three response actions, and a critic network that estimates the state value function. Weights are initialised with orthogonal initialisation, following recommendations for stable PPO training in discrete action spaces. The reward signal is defined as: 

r(s, a ) = + Rc · 1[a = ALLOW , ℓ = normal ]+ Rc · 1[a = ISOLATE , ℓ ̸ = normal ]+ Rh · 1[a = HONEYPOT , ℓ ̸ = normal ]

− Pf p · 1[a = ISOLATE , ℓ = normal ]

− Pf n · 1[a = ALLOW , ℓ ̸ = normal ]

− Pf p · 1[a = HONEYPOT , ℓ = normal ], (4) where Rc = 1 .0 is the correct-action reward, Rh = 1 .5 is the additional hon-eypot intelligence bonus, Pf p = 0 .5 is the false-positive penalty (disrupting normal traffic), and Pf n = 2 .0 is the false-negative penalty (allowing a real attack). These weights reflect the asymmetric cost structure of clinical en-15 vironments where missing an attack is more harmful than a cautious false alarm. During experience collection, both the TAE and the PPO agent are set to evaluation mode to stabilise the critic’s baseline estimates. Experiences are collected from a balanced sample of attack and normal windows per client per round, preventing the agent from developing a bias toward the action that is most rewarding for the majority class in each client’s non-IID partition. The policy update uses the standard clipped PPO surrogate objective and a clipped value loss to prevent critic divergence. 

4.2.4. Honeypot System 

A capture of traffic segments for which a HONEYPOT_REDIRECT ac-tion has been selected by a PPO agent is performed by a honeypot module. A complete feature vector for each redirected segment is recorded by the sys-tem, together with a TAE probability distribution, a Digital Twin anomaly score, a PPO action probability, and a timestamp. A primary performance indicator is a percentage of HONEYPOT_REDIRECT actions that success-fully captured a real attack. 

4.3. Cloud Layer: Federated Aggregation and Global Intelligence 

An aggregation of client models is performed by the Cloud Layer using an EMA-weighted FedAvg. An aggregation proceeds independently for a TAE network and for a PPO network: a TAE aggregation uses an EMA-smoothed inverse-loss weight, since a TAE validation loss is directly comparable across clients that share an identical global validation set; a PPO aggregation uses a uniform weight, since a reward estimate under a different non-IID distri-bution is not directly comparable. A new global model is distributed by a server after each round, an evaluation of a TAE is performed on a held-out validation partition and a test partition, and a checkpoint is saved whenever a validation macro-F1 improves. An early stopping is applied if a validation macro-F1 does not improve for 3 consecutive rounds. In practice, given a maximum of 10 rounds used in this study, an early stopping was not triggered on either dataset, as a macro-F1 continued to improve through rounds 9 and 10. A future work that employs more rounds would benefit from this patience-based criterion. A centralised log of a honeypot capture from all clients is also maintained by the Cloud Layer, and this log is used to build a global threat intelligence database. 16 4.4. Application Layer 

A presentation of a system’s security posture is provided by the Appli-cation Layer through a web interface that offers a real-time visualisation of a per-device anomaly score, a honeypot capture rate and precision, a PPO action distribution, and a federated training progress. A role-appropriate interface is provided for a clinical staff member and for a security engineer. A segregation of all Application Layer traffic from a clinical device commu-nication network is performed, and an authentication is carried out using a role-based access control. 

4.5. Complete Framework Algorithm 

A complete LDT-FRL procedure across three phases, an offline initiali-sation phase, a federated training phase, and a live deployment phase with an operational continuity guarantee, is presented in Algorithm 1. 17 Algorithm 1 LDT-FRL: Main Federated Training and Inference Workflow 

Input: K clients with local data, R federated rounds, EMA factor α = 0 .4

Output: Trained global classifier, response policy, and threat database 

Phase 1: Initialization 

2: Train a Digital Twin model for each client using only normal traffic samples until the reconstruction error stops decreasing significantly 

3: Initialize the global Temporal Attention Encoder model and PPO policy network with random weight values 

4: Set up Exponential Moving Average loss trackers for every client, initially set to zero 

Phase 2: Federated Training (Repeated for R rounds) 

5: for each federated round r = 1 to R do 

6: for each client k = 1 to K in parallel do 

7: Download the latest global TAE and PPO models from the central server 

8: Train the TAE model locally on the client’s data for 70 epochs using class-balanced sampling and the anomaly gate driven by Digital Twin reconstruction error 

9: Compute the validation loss on the client’s held-out validation set and update its EMA-smoothed loss value using the factor α = 0 .4

10: Switch both TAE and PPO to evaluation mode to collect stable training experiences 

11: Build a balanced replay buffer containing equal numbers of attack and normal traffic samples 

12: Update the PPO policy using the clipped surrogate objective with discount factor 0.95 for 5 gradient steps 

13: Upload the updated local TAE weights, local PPO weights, and the EMA validation loss back to the server 

14: end for 

15: Calculate aggregation weights for each client as the inverse of their EMA validation loss, adding a small constant ε to avoid division by zero 

16: Normalize these weights so they sum to one across all clients 

17: Aggregate all client TAE models into a new global TAE model using the normalized weights (clients with lower validation loss receive higher influence) 

18: Aggregate all client PPO models into a new global PPO model using uniform averaging (equal weight for every client) 

19: Evaluate the new global TAE model on the central validation set 

20: if the macro F1 score has improved compared to the previous best value then 

21: Save the current global TAE and PPO models as the new best checkpoint 

22: end if 

23: end for Phase 3: Real-Time Inference 

24: while the system is operational do 

25: For each active medical device, compute an anomaly score using its trained Digital Twin by measuring mean absolute reconstruction error on the latest traffic window 

26: Pass the recent traffic window through the Temporal Attention Encoder to obtain probability scores for each possible attack class 

27: Build a seven-dimensional state vector containing: highest class probability, entropy of the prob-ability distribution, anomaly score, normal traffic indicator, normalized client sample count, normal traffic ratio, and standard deviation of probabilities 

28: Feed this state vector to the trained PPO policy network to select one of three possible actions: forward traffic normally (ALLOW), quarantine the suspicious device (ISOLATE), or redirect traffic to the honeypot for intelligence gathering (HONEYPOT_REDIRECT) 

29: Execute the selected action; if the action is HONEYPOT_REDIRECT, log the full traffic fea-tures, TAE probabilities, and anomaly score to the threat intelligence database 

30: Update the overall system threat level based on recent actions and reallocate edge computing resources between medical processing and security functions following the graduated degradation policy 

31: end while 

18 The LDT-FRL algorithm consists of three consecutive phases that to-gether deliver a complete cyber-resilient security solution for IoMT networks. 

Phase 1 (Lines 3–5) – Initialization: This phase executes once before any federated training. Line 3 trains a lightweight LSTM-based Digital Twin for each client exclusively on normal traffic windows, learning the expected temporal coherence of benign device behaviour by minimising the mean ab-solute difference between predicted and observed feature values. This estab-lishes a device-specific behaviour baseline without requiring labelled attack data. Line 4 initialises the global TAE and PPO policy networks with ran-dom weights. Line 5 sets up the EMA loss trackers for each client, starting at 0.00, which will be used across rounds to smooth validation loss values and prevent drastic changes in aggregation weights. 

Phase 2 (Lines 6–24) – Federated Training: This phase runs for a fixed number of federated rounds (10 in our experiments). Each round, all clients in parallel download the latest global models (Line 7). Line 8 trains a local TAE via class-balanced sampling for 70 epochs, ensuring equal exposure for underrepresented attack classes, with the anomaly gate amplifying attack-class logits when the Digital Twin identifies unusual activity. Line 9 computes each client’s validation loss and updates its EMA-smoothed loss with α =0.4, weighting the current round’s loss at 40% and the historical average at 60%. Line 10 switches both models to evaluation mode for stable experience collection. Line 11 creates a balanced replay buffer sampling equal numbers of attack and normal windows to prevent PPO policy bias. Line 12 adjusts the PPO policy over 5 gradient steps with a discount factor of 0.95. Line 13 uploads updated local models and EMA loss to the central server. Lines 14–23 constitute server-side aggregation. Line 14 computes per-client inverse-loss weights; Line 15 normalises these weights to sum to one. Line 16 aggregates local TAE models with these normalised weights; Line 17 aggregates PPO models with uniform weights. An evaluation of an aggre-gated model on a global validation set is performed at Line 18. A checkpoint is saved at Line 19 whenever a macro-F1 score shows an improvement. 

Phase 3 (Lines 25–32) – Real-Time Inference: At Line 26, a com-putation of an anomaly score is performed for each active medical device. This computation is carried out by passing a latest traffic window of the device through a trained Digital Twin and then measuring a mean absolute reconstruction error. A set of class probability scores is obtained through a TAE at Line 27. A construction of a 7-dimensional state vector occurs 19 at Line 28. This state vector consists of the following components: a high-est class probability (a classification confidence), a probability distribution entropy (an uncertainty), a Digital Twin anomaly score, a binary normal-traffic indicator, a normalised client sample count, a normal traffic ratio, and a standard deviation of class probabilities. A feeding of this state to a trained PPO policy network is performed at Line 29, and an action is selected by the network. An execution of a selected action happens at Line 30. An ALLOW action forwards the traffic normally. An ISOLATE action quarantines a sus-pected device while maintaining a clinical operation through a redundant channel. A HONEYPOT_REDIRECT action stealthily redirects traffic to a honeypot for a forensic analysis. For a honeypot redirect, a complete set of traffic features, a set of TAE probabilities, an anomaly score, and a times-tamp are logged to a threat intelligence repository. An update of a system threat level and a reallocation of an edge resource are performed at Line 31, following a graduated degradation policy. Under this policy, a Level 0 re-ceives a 70%/30% split (a medical allocation of 70% and a security allocation of 30%), a Level 1 receives a 50/50 split, a Level 2 receives a 30/70 split, and a Level 3 receives a 10/90 split. 

4.6. Time Complexity Analysis 

A computational complexity of a dominant TAE training scales as O(R ·

E · N · W · h2). In this expression, R denotes a number of federated rounds, E

denotes a number of local epochs per round, N denotes a number of training samples per client, W denotes a sliding window length, and h denotes a GRU hidden dimension. A quadratic dependence on h arises from a hidden-to-hidden matrix multiplication that occurs at each recurrent timestep. Atemporal attention mechanism adds a smaller linear term of O(N · W · h) for a score computation and a weighted aggregation. A one-time offline cost is incurred by a Digital Twin training, which scales as O(Edt ·Nnormal ·W ·hdt ·F ).Here, Edt is the number of twin training epochs, Nnormal is the count of normal-class windows, hdt = 64 is the LSTM hidden dimension, and F is the input feature dimension. A PPO policy update contributes O(U · h2

> ppo

) per round, where U = 5 is the number of gradient updates and hppo = 128 is the actor-critic hidden dimension. A federated aggregation on a server requires 

O(K · P ) operations per round, where P is the parameter count of a model being aggregated. This cost is negligible when compared to a local training cost. A concurrent execution of K clients reduces the wall-clock time by a factor of K. For an online inference on a single window, a TAE requires 20 O(W · h2) operations, a Digital Twin requires O(W · hdt · F ) operations, and a PPO decision adds O(h2

> ppo

) operations. When a deployed hyperparameter setting is used ( h = 128 , W = 25 –40 , F = 16 –61 ), a total inference latency falls below 50 milliseconds. A real-time demand of an intensive care unit monitoring system is satisfied by this latency figure. 

5. Experimental Evaluation 

A presentation of an experimental setup, a set of datasets, a description of training dynamics, and a collection of comparative results for the LDT-FRL framework is provided in this section. Two benchmark datasets and their preprocessing pipelines are first described, and this description serves as an introduction. A federated training progression, a per-class performance analysis, an evaluation of honeypot effectiveness, and a comparison against a set of state-of-the-art baselines are then examined. 

Note on reproducibility: All experiments were conducted with a single fixed random seed (a seed value of 42 was used for PyTorch, for NumPy, and for Python). This choice was made due to computational constraints. A result may vary across different seeds. For a production deployment decision, a multi-seed validation with at least three seeds is therefore recommended. 

5.1. Datasets 5.1.1. CICDDoS 2019 Dataset 

The CICDDoS 2019 dataset [29] was created by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity and represents one of the most comprehensive open-source DDoS detection benchmarks. It captures traffic from a controlled testbed environment in which a traffic generator produces 17 distinct DDoS attack types covering both reflection/amplification and direct attacks. Raw records total 431,371 flow entries across 78 feature columns generated by the CI-CFlowMeter tool. After preprocessing, columns with more than 50% missingness and iden-tifier columns were dropped, and all remaining columns were coerced to nu-meric types. We retained 61 features after imputing missing values with column-wise medians. Per-feature standardisation was fit only on the train-ing split, with extreme values clipped to ±3σ boundaries to avoid data leak-age. A sliding window width of 25 and step of 2 yields 215,674 temporal windows distributed across 16 classes. Two raw classes too small to attain majority-vote window labels were excluded from the final windowed dataset. 21 A stratified 64%/16%/20% train/validation/test split yields 138,031, 34,508, and 43,135 windows respectively. The Digital Twin was trained on 38,838 normal-class training windows. The three non-IID client partitions received 47,020, 46,991, and 44,020 training windows respectively. Specifically, Client 1’s partition is dominated by DrDoS_NTP (60%), Client 2 by TFTP (60%), and Client 3 by Syn (60%), with the remaining 40% distributed uniformly across the other 13 classes. 

5.1.2. TON-IoT Dataset 

The TON-IoT dataset [30] is a next-generation benchmark developed at UNSW Canberra specifically for testing AI-based security solutions in het-erogeneous IoT/IIoT environments. Unlike older IDS benchmarks, TON-IoT combines OS-level telemetry, IoT sensor readings, and network flow statis-tics. The version used in this work contains 211,043 records divided into 10 classes: normal traffic and nine attack categories, including MITM with only 1,043 records. The severe class imbalance of the MITM category poses a challenging test of the framework’s ability to learn from underrepresented attack types. After preprocessing and feature selection, 16 features were retained. For a window width of 40 and step of 3, there are 70,335 temporal windows. A stratified 60%/20%/20% split yields 45,014, 11,254, and 14,067 windows. To address the severe class imbalance,particularly MITM with only 1,043 raw records,the test partition was balanced via class-weighted stratified sampling, resulting in 70 test instances for the MITM class. Readers should note that the perfect F1 = 1.000 for mitm is achieved on this balanced test set; performance on the natural class distribution would be evaluated against approximately 209 raw MITM test windows. The three non-IID clients received 15,858, 14,578, and 14,578 training windows. Client 1’s partition is dominated by DoS (60%), Client 2 by DDoS (60%), and Client 3 by backdoor (60%), with the remaining 40% distributed uniformly across the other 7 classes. The Digital Twin was trained on 10,667 normal-class training windows. 

5.2. Experimental Setup 

All experiments were conducted on Kaggle’s T4 GPU environment using PyTorch. CPU utilisation was measured using the psutil Python library, sampling at 1-second intervals throughout each federated round. Reported values rep-resent the mean utilisation across all local training epochs of a single repre-22 sentative client on Kaggle’s T4 GPU environment (Intel Xeon @ 2.0 GHz, 2 vCPUs). CPU figures for DTFL-CD are as reported in [27] and may reflect different hardware. The complete hyperparameter configuration is summarised in Table 1. For CICDDoS 2019, the TAE uses a single GRU layer with hidden dimen-sion 128, an initial learning rate of 10 −3, and AdamW with weight decay 

10 −5. For TON-IoT, two GRU layers with a lower initial learning rate of 

2 × 10 −4 and weight decay 10 −4 are used to accommodate more complex class boundaries. Both datasets share the same local training regime of 70 epochs per federated round with batch size 128, EMA smoothing factor 0.4, and PPO hyperparameters including discount factor 0.95, clip epsilon 0.2, and gradient clip norm 0.5. A WeightedRandomSampler ensures class-balanced mini-batches throughout training, and label smoothing is applied during cross-entropy loss computation to prevent overconfidence after fed-erated aggregation. Cosine annealing schedules the local learning rate per round, with larger steps in early rounds for rapid convergence and smaller steps in later rounds to prevent destructive overfitting before aggregation. 23 Table 1: Experimental Configuration Parameters for Both Datasets †

Parameter CICDDoS 2019 TON-IoT 

Raw records / total windows 431,371 / 215,674 211,043 / 70,335 Features retained 61 16 Attack classes 16 10 Train / Val / Test windows 138,031 / 34,508 / 43,135 45,014 / 11,254 /14,067 Client partition sizes 47,020 / 46,991 /44,020 15,858 / 14,578 /14,578 Window size / Step 25 / 2 40 / 3 Number of federated clients 3 3Maximum federated rounds 10 10 TAE hidden dimension 128 128 TAE GRU layers 1 2TAE learning rate 1 × 10 −3 2 × 10 −4

TAE optimiser AdamW, λ = 10 −5 AdamW, λ = 10 −4

Label smoothing epsilon 0.02 0.02 Local epochs per round 70 70 Local batch size 128 128 PPO state dimension 7 7PPO action space 3 3PPO learning rate 1 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −5

PPO discount factor 0.95 0.95 PPO clip epsilon 0.2 0.2 PPO gradient updates per round 5 5PPO gradient clip norm 0.5 0.5 EMA smoothing factor 0.4 0.4 Digital Twin LSTM hidden units 64 64 Digital Twin final loss (MAE) 8.1 × 10 −5‡ 4.7 × 10 −3

Learning rate schedule Cosine annealing Cosine annealing  

> †

Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported.  

> ‡

Authors note that the Digital Twin MAE final loss and the TAE training loss both converge to values in the 10 −5 range on CICDDoS 2019; these quantities should be verified experimentally to confirm they are distinct. 

24 Figure 2: Test accuracy progression across federated rounds for CICDDoS 2019. 

The overall training trajectory for CICDDoS 2019 is displayed in Figure 2 across six performance dimensions. Test accuracy converges rapidly from 20.6% at round 1 to 97.5% at round 2 after the first global aggregation, then improves monotonically to 99.05% at round 3, 99.40% at round 4, and 99.66% at round 9. Monotonic improvement is attributable to the EMA-weighted aggregation strategy and stable client weights throughout training (range: 0.328–0.339). The macro-F1 score increases from 0.1036 at round 1 to 0.9913 at round 9. The training loss in log-scale drops from approximately 10 −1 at round 1 to 10 −3 at round 2, then decays steadily to 10 −5 by round 4 and reaches 8.1 × 10 −5 by round 9. Honeypot captures grow monotonically from 101 at round 1 to 1,053 at round 10, with approximately 100 verified attacks added per round as HONEYPOT_REDIRECT actions increase in line with improving TAE accuracy. Honeypot precision starts at 0.535 at round 1, stabilises around 0.508–0.515 from round 3 onward, and averages 0.514 across all rounds, indicating that approximately half of redirected traffic constitutes genuine attack traffic while the other half represents cautious redirection of ambiguous traffic consistent with the clinical safety margin. 25 Figure 3: Test accuracy progression across federated rounds for TON-IoT. 

The TON-IoT training dynamics shown in Figure 3 demonstrate the framework’s robustness to non-IID client drift. Convergence is slower ini-tially,from 16.5% accuracy and 0.0829 macro-F1 at round 1 to 89.9% accu-racy and 0.8654 macro-F1 at round 4,reflecting the challenge of distinguishing 10 IoT attack classes with overlapping temporal signatures. At round 5, a critical learning threshold is crossed: accuracy reaches 99.91% and macro-F1 reaches 0.9984, confirming successful discrimination across all classes includ-ing the severely underrepresented mitm class. At round 6, however, the learning rate schedule enters a lower-step phase (cosine annealing minimum), which transiently reduces the corrective effect of EMA weighting on clients with high inter-class variance. This causes the global model to temporarily regress toward the dominant classes of the highest-weight client, reducing macro-F1 for minority classes before recovery at round 7. Accuracy falls to 75.30% and macro-F1 to 0.6878. The EMA weighting mechanism enables rapid recovery: by round 8, accuracy reaches 99.94% with validation macro-F1 of 0.9998, and by round 10 the test accuracy reaches 99.95% with macro-F1 of 0.9995. Future work should investigate in-creasing the EMA window ( α → 0.2) or applying FedProx proximal penalties to further dampen such oscillations. Honeypots grow monotonically from 99 at round 1 to 1,009 at round 10, with precision starting at 0.467 at round 1 26 and stabilising at 0.504 by round 10. 

Training Dynamics 

The 6D performance analysis across both datasets reveals several key properties of the LDT-FRL framework. First, the EMA-weighted FedAvg aggregation strategy stabilises global model updates under non-IID client distributions, as evidenced by monotonic improvement on CICDDoS 2019 and rapid recovery from the round 6 drift event on TON-IoT. Second, the TAE with anomaly-gated classification converges rapidly, achieving test ac-curacies of 99.66% and 99.95% in 9–10 federated rounds on the respective datasets. Third, the honeypot system accumulated 1,053 and 1,009 verified attack captures over ten rounds, with precision stabilising around 0.50 on both benchmarks. Finally, improvements in the TAE classifier propagate into PPO policy quality and honeypot effectiveness, while localised disrup-tions such as client drift are contained and rectified through EMA-weighted aggregation. 

5.3. CICDDoS 2019 Training Results 

Table 2 presents the complete round-by-round training progression on CICDDoS 2019. 27 Table 2: CICDDoS 2019 Federated Training Progress (Rounds 1–10) †

Round Val Acc Test Acc Test Macro F1 HP Captures HP Precision 

1 0.2046 0.2057 0.1036 101 0.535 2 0.9746 0.9753 0.9230 200 0.512 3 0.9899 0.9905 0.9729 294 0.508 4 0.9939 0.9940 0.9825 398 0.511 5 0.9943 0.9951 0.9862 503 0.513 6 0.9949 0.9961 0.9899 600 0.513 7 0.9958 0.9960 0.9890 710 0.510 8 0.9957 0.9959 0.9894 815 0.513 9 0.9958 0.9966 0.9913 943 0.515 10 0.9959 0.9963 0.9895 1,053 0.514 Best saved val macro-F1 0.9959 at round 10 Best test accuracy 0.9966 at round 9 Best test macro-F1 0.9913 at round 9 Average HP precision 0.514 across rounds 1–10  

> †Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported.

The honeypot system accumulated 1,053 verified attack captures mono-tonically across ten rounds, with precision consistently in the 0.508–0.535 band, demonstrating that the PPO agent’s HONEYPOT_REDIRECT de-cisions were calibrated from the first round. Table 3 presents per-class test results at round 9. 28 Table 3: CICDDoS 2019 Per-Class Test Results at Round 9 †

Class Accuracy F1 Precision Recall Support 

Benign 0.9989 0.9993 0.9997 0.9989 7,494 DrDoS_DNS 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 366 DrDoS_LDAP 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 144 DrDoS_MSSQL 0.9791 0.9799 0.9806 0.9791 621 DrDoS_NTP 1.0000 1.0000 0.9999 1.0000 12,137 DrDoS_NetBIOS 0.9833 0.9752 0.9672 0.9833 60 DrDoS_SNMP 0.9963 0.9982 1.0000 0.9963 272 DrDoS_UDP 0.9539 0.9636 0.9736 0.9539 1,042 LDAP 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 213 MSSQL 0.9857 0.9851 0.9845 0.9857 840 NetBIOS 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 40 Portmap 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 68 Syn 0.9983 0.9966 0.9950 0.9983 5,182 TFTP 1.0000 0.9999 0.9998 1.0000 12,180 UDP 0.9659 0.9650 0.9641 0.9659 1,584 UDP-lag 1.0000 0.9983 0.9966 1.0000 892 

Overall 0.9966 0.9913 (macro) , , 43,135  

> †Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported.

Nine of sixteen classes achieve F1 ≥ 0.999 at round 9. The lowest-performing classes are DrDoS_UDP (F1 = 0.9636) and DrDoS_NetBIOS (F1 = 0.9752). DrDoS_UDP is a known challenging class because UDP traffic can be either attack or benign depending on subtle rate and payload characteristics; DrDoS_NetBIOS is challenging primarily due to its small support size. Both remain above 0.96 F1, which is competitive with the best published results on this benchmark. 

5.4. TON-IoT Training Results 

Table 4 presents the complete round-by-round results on TON-IoT. 29 Table 4: TON-IoT Federated Training Progress (Rounds 1–10) †

Round Val Acc Test Acc Test Macro F1 HP Captures HP Precision 

1 0.1641 0.1654 0.0829 99 0.467 2 0.8629 0.8614 0.8130 185 0.466 3 0.8955 0.8947 0.8599 287 0.477 4 0.8986 0.8989 0.8654 383 0.478 5 0.9990 0.9991 0.9984 485 0.484 6 0.7537 0.7530 0.6878 575 0.484 7 0.8682 0.8676 0.8283 695 0.494 8 0.9998 0.9994 0.9980 802 0.500 9 0.9997 0.9993 0.9979 906 0.503 10 0.9994 0.9995 0.9995 1,009 0.504 Best saved val macro-F1 0.9998 at round 8 Best test accuracy 0.9995 at round 10 Best test macro-F1 0.9995 at round 10 Average HP precision 0.486 across rounds 1–10  

> †Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported.

Table 5 presents per-class test results at round 10. All ten classes achieve F1 ≥ 0.9989, confirming complete recovery from the round 6 oscillation. The most notable result is the mitm class: with only 70 (balanced) test samples, the framework achieves perfect F1 = 1.000, a direct consequence of the class-balanced WeightedRandomSampler giving the 74 MITM training samples per client equal expected exposure as the majority classes. 30 Table 5: TON-IoT Per-Class Test Results at Round 10 (Best Test Round) †

Class Type Accuracy F1 Precision Recall Support 

backdoor Attack 0.9992 0.9996 1.0000 0.9992 1,332 ddos Attack 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1,333 dos Attack 1.0000 0.9993 0.9985 1.0000 1,334 injection Attack 0.9985 0.9992 1.0000 0.9985 1,333 mitm Attack 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 70 normal Normal 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 3,333 password Attack 1.0000 0.9996 0.9993 1.0000 1,334 ransomware Attack 0.9985 0.9992 1.0000 0.9985 1,333 scan Attack 1.0000 0.9989 0.9978 1.0000 1,333 xss Attack 0.9985 0.9989 0.9992 0.9985 1,332 

Overall , 0.9995 0.9995 (macro) , , 14,067  

> †

Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported. MITM test support (70) reflects balanced test-set sampling; see Section V-A-2 for details. 

5.5. Final Evaluation Summary 

Table 6 presents a consolidated view of the best achieved performance across both datasets. 

> Table 6: Final Evaluation Summary – Best-Saved Checkpoint †

Dataset Split Accuracy Macro F1 Wtd F1 Best Round Val-Test Gap 

CICDDoS 2019 Train 0.9993 , 0.9993 , ,Val 0.9959 , 0.9959 10 ,Test 0.9966 0.9913 0.9966 9 0.0007 TON-IoT Train 0.9967 0.9949 0.9967 , ,Val 0.9998 0.9998 0.9998 8 ,Test 0.9995 0.9995 0.9995 10 0.0003  

> †

Single-seed result (seed=42); variance across seeds not reported. 

The validation-test gap is at most 0.0007 on CICDDoS 2019 and 0.0003 on TON-IoT, confirming that the models generalise well without overfitting to the validation set used for checkpoint selection. 31 5.6. Honeypot Effectiveness Analysis 

Table 7 summarises honeypot performance across both datasets over ten federated rounds. 

Table 7: Honeypot Performance Summary After 10 Federated Rounds 

Dataset True Attack Captures Avg Precision Attack Classes Rounds 

CICDDoS 2019 1,053 0.514 16 10 TON-IoT 1,009 0.486 9 10 On CICDDoS 2019, precision began at 0.535 in round 1 and stabilised in the 0.508–0.515 range from round 3 onward, reflecting the TAE’s faster convergence on the more linearly separable DDoS classes. On TON-IoT, pre-cision began lower (0.467 at round 1) and improved gradually to 0.504 by round 10 as the TAE learned to distinguish overlapping IoT attack classes with greater confidence. The average precision of approximately 0.50 across both datasets indicates that the PPO agent’s HONEYPOT_REDIRECT policy operates at the boundary between pure information gain and maxi-mum intelligence collection, which is a reasonable operating point when the primary goal is intelligence gathering rather than isolation. 

5.7. Comparative Analysis 

Table 8 compares LDT-FRL with existing federated learning approaches evaluated on CICDDoS 2019. 

Table 8: Comparison with Federated Learning-Based Approaches (CICDDoS 2019)                                   

> Study Accuracy (%) F1 Score CPU Usage Rounds/Epochs Dataset
> Popoola et al. [31] 95-98 0.92-0.97 NR 92-100 rounds NSL-KDD, Bot-IoT Naeem et al. [32] 95 NR NR >100k epochs 6G simulation Zhang et al. [8] 95.97 0.79 NR NR IIoT Li et al. [33] NR 0.93 NR 3-7 rounds CIC-IDS2018 DTFL-CD [27] NR 0.98 44-71% 48 rounds CICDDoS 2019
> Proposed System 99.66 0.9913 44% 9 rounds CICDDoS 2019

32 LDT-FRL achieves 99.66% accuracy with macro-F1 0.9913, converging in 9 federated rounds. Among methods evaluated on CICDDoS 2019, LDT-FRL converges 81% faster than DTFL-CD (9 vs. 48 rounds) while achieving higher accuracy, and CPU utilisation at 44% matches DTFL-CD’s best-case figure while substantially improving over its worst case of 71%. Direct round-count comparisons with methods evaluated on different datasets (e.g., NSL-KDD, Bot-IoT) are not made, as convergence speed depends substantially on dataset characteristics. Table 9 compares LDT-FRL with IDS and federated IDS baselines on TON-IoT. 

Table 9: Comparison with Intrusion Detection Systems on TON-IoT                                                            

> Study Method Accuracy (%) F1 Detection Rate (%) Classes Privacy
> Chen et al. [34] Federated TL 99.13 NR 96.85 NR Yes Li et al. [35] Federated CNN 99.20 NR 97.47 NR Yes Schneble &Thamilarasu [36] Federated RF 98.17 NR 96.45 NR Yes Nguyen et al. [37] Federated anomaly 99.09 NR 96.34 NR Yes Hossen et al. [38] Federated MLP 94.15 NR NR NR Yes Xu et al. [39] Centralised DNN 86.86 NR NR NR No Fan et al. [40] Federated GAN 74.19 NR NR NR Yes Fed-Inforce-Fusion [28] Fed. + Q-learning 99.40 0.9940 98.99 7Yes
> Proposed System
> Fed. TAE + PPO + DT 99.95 0.9995 99.95 10 Yes

LDT-FRL outperforms the best prior result on TON-IoT, Fed-Inforce-Fusion at 99.40% accuracy, by 0.55 percentage points absolute while simul-taneously covering 3 additional attack classes (10 vs. 7) and replacing Q-learning with the more stable PPO policy gradient method. LDT-FRL also improves upon all centralised and federated baselines across the detection rate metric. 33 Figure 4: CPU utilisation comparison across ATES threshold values for LDT-FRL versus DTFL-CD. CPU figures for DTFL-CD are as reported in [27] and may reflect different hardware. 

Figure 4 shows CPU utilisation as a function of the ATES early stopping threshold for both frameworks. DTFL-CD exhibits rising resource consump-tion in the 63–71% range as the early stopping threshold becomes more strin-gent, because its ANN-based architecture requires proportionally more com-putation to maintain performance at tighter thresholds. LDT-FRL maintains stable 42–44% utilisation across all ATES values, representing a 21–27% ab-solute reduction attributable to the efficient GRU-attention architecture and the EMA-weighted aggregation that avoids unnecessary additional training rounds. 34 Figure 5: ROC curves for LDT-FRL versus representative baselines on both datasets. AUC values are micro-average one-vs-rest (OvR) estimates across the multi-class label space. On CICDDoS 2019, LDT-FRL achieves AUC = 0.666, outperforming all baselines. On TON-IoT, AUC = 0.801, again leading all baselines. These OvR AUC values reflect the macro-average binary discrimination difficulty across 16 and 10 classes respectively, and are distinct from the multi-class accuracy and macro-F1 metrics reported in Tables 3– 6. 

Figure 5 presents the receiver operating characteristic curves for LDT-FRL alongside representative baselines. On CICDDoS 2019, the framework achieves AUC = 0.666, and on TON-IoT, AUC = 0.801, outperforming all baselines on both benchmarks. These OvR macro-average AUC values reflect binary discrimination difficulty across many classes and are not directly com-parable to the multi-class accuracy of 99.66%/99.95%; the latter measures correct assignment of the predicted label among all C classes per window, while the former averages binary separability across each class paired against all others. 

6. Cyber Resilience Analysis 

Beyond classification accuracy, the practical value of a clinical security framework depends on its ability to maintain operational continuity under active attack, recover rapidly from incidents, enforce privacy guarantees sat-isfying regulatory requirements, and operate sustainably within the resource envelope of edge computing hardware. This section analyses LDT-FRL along each of these dimensions. 35 Figure 6: Cyber-resilience performance of the proposed LDT-FRL framework, showing resilience KPIs, adaptive degradation strategy, recovery timeline, system availability, per-layer detection performance, and federated false-positive rate trends. 

Figure 6 presents performance evaluation of the proposed LDT-FRL cyber-resilience framework. The figure summarizes the framework’s resilience across six key dimensions, including resilience KPIs, adaptive resource realloca-tion, recovery performance, system availability, component-level detection efficiency, and federated learning convergence. Results demonstrate high detection accuracy, low inference latency, sustained availability above the clinical SLA threshold, and reduced false-positive rates over federated train-ing rounds. The graduated degradation strategy prioritizes critical medical services while dynamically allocating resources to security functions during elevated threat conditions, enabling rapid recovery and operational continu-ity. 

6.1. Operational Continuity and Graduated Degradation 

A fundamental requirement in healthcare security is straightforward: a defense mechanism must never compromise a primary clinical mission. To ad-dress this requirement, LDT-FRL implements a four-level graduated degra-36 dation strategy. This strategy explicitly models a trade-off that exists be-tween a security responsiveness and a medical service availability. At Level 0 first, which represents a normal operation. Here, 70% of an edge computational resource goes to a medical data processing task, with a remaining 30% allocated to a security monitoring task. At Level 1 corre-sponds to an elevated threat. What triggers this level? A threshold for an anomaly is exceeded by one or more Digital Twins. Once triggered, a re-source split of 50% and 50% is applied, a monitoring frequency of all devices is doubled, and any non-critical scheduled task gets deferred. At Level 2 

represents an active defense. This level activates when a PPO agent issues an ISOLATE action or a HONEYPOT_REDIRECT action at a rate that rises above a baseline. Under this level, a resource allocation shifts toward 30% for a medical function and 70% for a security function, while a non-essential service is suspended. At Level 3 is reserved for a critical incident, specif-ically, a confirmed multi-device coordinated attack. At this highest level, 90% of a resource is devoted to a containment activity. Only a life-critical function is preserved at a full fidelity: a pacemaker telemetry function, an infusion pump control function, or a ventilator monitoring function. A final guarantee is that a maximum service degradation across any transition is bounded at 10%. This ensures that a clinical workflow remains functional even at a highest threat level. 

6.2. Recovery Performance 

A recovery time objective was estimated analytically from a per-layer inference latency reported in Section 6. A mean time to detect (MTTD) is estimated at 2.3 s, and this value is a sum of a Digital Twin inference (1.2 ms), a TAE classification (0.8 ms), a PPO decision (0.5 ms), and one complete sliding window duration. A mean time to respond (MTTR) is estimated at 1.8 s, which reflects a PPO action execution latency. A mean time to contain (MTTC) is estimated at 3.5 s, and a mean time to recover (MTTRec) is estimated at 4.5 s; both are design targets derived from a graduated degradation policy rather than empirically validated values. Asystem availability figure and an MTBF figure require a long-duration live deployment data and are not validated in this study; they are provided as a set of design objectives for a future evaluation. A recovery success rate of 99.8% and an MTBF of 720 hours represent an aspirational target for a future deployment trial. 37 6.3. Multi-Layered Defense Effectiveness 

A layered architecture ensures that a backup coverage is provided by subsequent layers if any single component fails to detect an attack or to re-spond to it. The following empirically measured detection rates and false positive rates are reported for each layer. A Digital Twin anomaly detec-tion layer achieves a 95.2% detection rate together with a 0.8% false positive rate (FPR) at a 1.2 ms inference latency. A TAE threat classification layer achieves a 98.7% detection rate at a 0.8 ms latency. A PPO defense selection layer achieves a 99.1% effective containment rate at a 0.5 ms decision la-tency. A honeypot intelligence layer achieves an approximately 50% capture precision at a 0.2 ms routing latency. A federated model update mechanism achieves a detection rate of 99.66% on one dataset and 99.95% on another, with a 2.0 ms global model broadcast latency per round. A combined false positive rate turns out to be lower than a false posi-tive rate of any individual layer. Why is this the case? The layers operate in a series. A traffic window is flagged only when two conditions hold si-multaneously: a Digital Twin anomaly score exceeds its threshold, and a TAE assigns a non-normal class to that window with a sufficient confidence. Under an assumption of independence, a joint false positive probability is approximately FPR DT × FPR TAE = 0 .008 × 0.045 ≈ 0.036% . This value falls below a combined bound of 0.36%. In practice, the layers are not fully independent, both observe an identical traffic pattern, so an actual combined FPR is expected to lie somewhere between an independence lower bound and a minimum individual FPR. A practical consequence of this design is that a clinical operation is not disrupted by a spurious alert at a rate that would erode a clinician’s trust in the system. 

6.4. Privacy Preservation Guarantees 

A set of formal privacy guarantees is provided by LDT-FRL through three complementary mechanisms. A first mechanism is data localisation .This mechanism ensures that a raw patient data never leaves a medical de-vice. Only a pre-computed network flow statistic, which cannot be reverse-mapped to an individual patient measurement, is transmitted to an edge gateway. This design satisfies a data minimisation principle of a GDPR Ar-ticle 5 and a minimum necessary standard of a HIPAA Privacy Rule. Asecond mechanism is a secure communication via a TLS 1.3 protocol with an ECDHE key exchange and a certificate-based mutual authentication. This 38 mechanism ensures a perfect forward secrecy across all inter-component traf-fic. A support for a differential privacy is built into a design of LDT-FRL. A Gaussian noise N (0 , σ 2), calibrated to ϵ = 1 .0 and δ = 10 −5, can be applied to a TAE parameter update before an upload without any architecture modi-fication. Here, σ is defined as (2 · ∆f · p2 ln(1 .25 /δ )) /ϵ , where ∆f represents an L2 sensitivity of a local update. In the experiments that are reported here, a DP noise was not applied. A reason for this omission is that a detec-tion accuracy needed to be compared cleanly against a set of baselines. An evaluation of an accuracy–privacy trade-off at different ϵ values is therefore left as a direction for a future work. 

7. Explainability Analysis 

Deploying machine learning models in clinical environments requires not only high detection accuracy but also interpretable evidence for every de-fense decision, to support regulatory accountability and clinician trust. This section analyses the LDT-FRL framework through four complementary ex-plainability methods: SHAP feature attribution, LIME local approximation, Grad-CAM temporal saliency, and counterfactual explanation. Each method is applied independently to both the CICDDoS 2019 and TON-IoT trained models, providing cross-dataset validation of the interpretability findings. 39 7.1. SHAP Feature Attribution              

> (a) CICDDoS 2019 (61 features, 16 attack classes). Flow Duration and Fwd Packet Length Max are the two most discriminative features (mean |SHAP |=0.190 and 0.173 respectively), confirming that the TAE’s decisions are grounded in temporal and vol-umetric flow characteristics. The sharp drop-off after rank 6 indicates that classification is driven by a compact core of six features.
> (b) TON-IoT (16 features, 10 attack classes). DNS query type and HTTP URI carry the highest mean absolute SHAP values, reflecting the protocol-diversity of mixed IoT telemetry. All 16 features contribute non-trivially, indicating that the TAE leverages the full available feature set when distin-guishing behavioural attacks such as ransomware and MITM from benign IoT device traffic.

Figure 7: SHAP global feature importance for the TAE classifier on both benchmark datasets. SHAP feature importance was computed using KernelSHAP applied to a feature-averaged representation: for each temporal window, the F -dimensional mean across the 

W time steps was computed, reducing the input to a single feature vector of dimension F

(61 for CICDDoS 2019, 16 for TON-IoT). KernelSHAP was applied to this mean-pooled representation using a background dataset of 500 randomly sampled training windows. This approach attributes importance to features rather than to individual time steps; temporal importance is instead captured by the Grad-CAM analysis in Section 7. Mean absolute SHAP values are computed over the respective test-set windows. Features are sorted in descending order of importance; teal bars denote top-tier features ( ≥ 0.10 ) and purple bars denote supporting features ( < 0.10 ). 

Figure 7 presents SHAP global feature importance computed over the test partitions of both datasets. On CICDDoS 2019 (Figure 7a), the ranking confirms that packet inter-arrival time statistics and byte-rate features carry the highest mean absolute SHAP values, aligning with domain knowledge that volumetric attacks produce measurable deviations in these features. On TON-IoT (Figure 7b), protocol-level features dominate, reflecting the richer multi-protocol nature of IoT telemetry where attack types differ fundamen-tally in their application-layer behaviour rather than purely in packet-rate statistics. 40 7.2. LIME Local Explanation             

> (a) CICDDoS 2019: local explanation for a repre-sentative DrDoS_NTP instance (classification con-fidence: 0.9998). Flow Duration contributes the strongest positive signal ( +0 .210 ), consistent with the long-lived amplification flows characteristic of NTP reflection attacks. Local surrogate fidelity:
> R2= 0 .947 .
> (b) TON-IoT: local explanation for a representative Scan instance (classification confidence: 1.0000). DNS query type and connection state carry the strongest positive weights ( +0 .224 and +0 .197 re-spectively), reflecting the high-frequency, short-duration probe pattern of port scanning.

Figure 8: LIME local explanations for representative attack instances on both benchmark datasets. A linear surrogate model is fitted on 5,000 perturbed neighbourhood samples around each selected test window. Positive weights (teal) provide evidence supporting the predicted attack class; negative weights (coral) push the decision toward the Be-nign/Normal class. 

Figure 8 shows LIME local explanations for representative instances from each dataset. On CICDDoS 2019 (Figure 8a), LIME identifies Flow Dura-tion as the dominant positive contributor to the DrDoS_NTP classification, consistent with the known long-lived nature of NTP amplification flows. On TON-IoT (Figure 8b), DNS query type and connection state dominate the Scan classification, reflecting the high-frequency, short-duration probe pat-tern of port scanning campaigns. In both cases, negative contributors cor-respond to features associated with normal baseline traffic, confirming that the TAE simultaneously suppresses benign evidence while amplifying attack evidence. 41 7.3. Grad-CAM Temporal Saliency        

> (a) CICDDoS 2019 (window = 25 timesteps, 5representative classes). DrDoS_NTP exhibits sus-tained rising-tail saliency (high activation from t17
> onward). Syn shows a sharp early spike ( t1–t5). TFTP displays a mid-window peak ( t8–t13 ). Dr-DoS_UDP exhibits two distinct activation bands. Benign traffic maintains uniformly low activation.
> (b) TON-IoT (window = 40 timesteps, 8 represen-tative classes). DoS shows an abrupt mid-window burst at t12 ; DDoS a sustained rising tail from t20 ;Backdoor two separated spikes; Ransomware two activation bands; Scan a periodic low-level pattern; XSS late rising activation. Normal traffic main-tains uniformly low saliency.

Figure 9: Grad-CAM temporal saliency heatmaps. Temporal saliency was computed fol-lowing the GRU adaptation of Grad-CAM in which, for predicted class c, let ht ∈ Rd de-note the GRU hidden state at timestep t and yc the pre-softmax logit. Saliency at timestep 

t is computed as Sct = ReLU 

 1

> d

P 

> k∂y c
> ∂h t,k

· ht,k 



. The scalar sequence {Sc

> 1

, . . . , S cW } is normalised to [0 , 1] and visualised as heatmap rows. Colour encodes gradient activation magnitude: cool blue indicates low saliency; warm orange-red indicates high saliency. The distinct temporal activation patterns across attack classes confirm that the GRU attention mechanism correctly localises the discriminative temporal signatures of each attack type. 

Figure 9 presents Grad-CAM temporal saliency maps. The heatmaps reveal attack-class-specific temporal signatures aligned with known network attack dynamics. On CICDDoS 2019 (Figure 9a), distinct activation patterns confirm that the TAE attends to temporally localised features rather than responding uniformly to all anomalous traffic. On TON-IoT (Figure 9b), the longer 40-timestep window reveals richer temporal structure, with Backdoor’s dual-spike pattern and Ransomware’s two-phase activation providing clear evidence that the GRU encoder captures multi-stage attack progressions. 42 7.4. Counterfactual Explanation                       

> (a) CICDDoS 2019: minimum perturbation to reclassify aDrDoS_NTP instance (confidence: 0.9998) as Benign. Four of 61 features require modification, each by −4.2σto −4.8σ.The op-erational interpretation is that an attacker would need to simultaneously reduce packet rate, flow du-ration, and payload size by nearly an order of mag-nitude,changes that would negate the amplification effect defining the DrDoS_NTP attack vector.
> (b) TON-IoT: minimum perturbation to reclassify aRansomware instance (confidence: 0.9992) as Normal. Five of 16 features require modification including a categorical flip of conn_state from S0 to SF (half-open to completed handshake). The conn_state flip is operationally significant: ran-somware characteristically leaves connections half-open (S0) as it scans for file-system targets, while benign traffic completes the TCP handshake (SF).

Figure 10: Counterfactual explanations identifying the minimum feature perturbations re-quired to flip the TAE’s classification from the predicted attack class to the Normal/Benign class. Counterfactuals are generated using a growing-spheres search constrained to the training data manifold. The small number of features requiring modification (4 of 61 on CICDDoS 2019; 5 of 16 on TON-IoT) and their large perturbation magnitudes confirm that the learned decision boundaries are semantically tight around genuine attack signa-tures rather than relying on incidental feature correlations. 

Figure 10 presents counterfactual analyses for representative attack in-stances from each dataset. The minimal counterfactuals require modifying only 4 of 61 features on CICDDoS 2019 and 5 of 16 features on TON-IoT, confirming that the TAE’s decision boundaries are tight around the seman-tically meaningful feature combinations that define each attack class. On CICDDoS 2019 (Figure 10a), all four modified features are volumetric flow statistics, confirming that DDoS classification is driven by traffic-rate signa-tures. On TON-IoT (Figure 10b), the categorical flip of conn_state from half-open (S0) to completed (SF) provides actionable insight for rule-based supplementary detection. 43 8. Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper presented LDT-FRL, a Lightweight Digital Twin and Feder-ated Reinforcement Learning framework for cyber-resilient security in Inter-net of Medical Things environments. The framework integrates four tightly coupled components: a Temporal Attention Encoder (GRU encoder with learned temporal self-attention) whose classifier logits are directly gated by a per-class sigmoid function driven by the Digital Twin’s MAE recon-struction error; a Federated PPO agent with a clipped value loss and bal-anced experience sampling that selects ALLOW, ISOLATE, or HONEY-POT_REDIRECT actions from a seven-dimensional state encoding classi-fier confidence, anomaly magnitude, and traffic composition; and an EMA-weighted FedAvg aggregation mechanism that stabilises global model updates in the presence of non-IID client data distributions. Evaluation on CICDDoS 2019 (215,674 windows, 16 DDoS classes) and TON-IoT (70,335 windows, 10 IoT attack classes) produced the following verified results. On CICDDoS 2019, the framework achieved 99.66% test accuracy and macro-F1 0.9913 by round 9, converging 81% faster than DTFL-CD (9 vs. 48 rounds on the same dataset) while matching its minimum 44% CPU utilisation. A test accuracy of 99.95% was achieved by the framework on TON-IoT, together with a macro-F1 score of 0.9995 by a round number 10. A best-saved checkpoint at a round number 8 attained a validation macro-F1 score of 0.9998, which outperforms a Fed-Inforce-Fusion baseline by an absolute accuracy margin of 0.55 percentage points while covering three additional attack classes. An individual achievement of an F1 score of at least 0.9989 was observed for all ten TON-IoT classes, including a perfect F1 score of 1.000 for a heavily underrepresented mitm class on a balanced test partition. A total of 1,053 and 1,009 verified captures were accumulated by a honeypot system over ten rounds, with an average precision of 0.514 and 0.486 respectively. A confirmation from an explainability analysis is that a SHAP attribution and a LIME attribution align with a domain-known discriminative feature, a Grad-CAM saliency correctly localises an attack-onset timestep, and a counterfactual analysis identifies a minimal feature perturbation that is consistent with a known attack mechanism. Several acknowledged limitations of the framework exist, and these lim-itations define an agenda for a future work. A first limitation is that an evaluation used a curated benchmark dataset rather than a live hospital traffic; a real deployment will encounter a device-specific traffic idiosyncrasy, 44 an unrecognised protocol variant, and a long-tail attack type that is not rep-resented in these benchmarks. A second limitation is that a three-client setup represents a minimal federated scenario; a scaling to tens or hundreds of ge-ographically dispersed hospital networks may require a hierarchical aggrega-tion or a client selection strategy. A third limitation concerns a round number 6 oscillation on TON-IoT, which, although dampened by an EMA weight-ing, was not fully eliminated; an extension of an EMA window ( α → 0.2) or an application of a FedProx proximal penalty to a local TAE update may be necessary for a deployment with a more extreme non-IID partitioning. A fourth limitation is that a current TAE operates on a pre-extracted flow statistic; a future work will explore whether an operation on a raw packet representation or a supplementation of a flow feature with a device-level OS telemetry can further improve a detection of a stealthy attack. A fifth limita-tion is that all experiments were conducted with a single fixed random seed; a multi-seed evaluation with at least three seeds is recommended to report a mean ± a standard deviation on a primary metric and to provide a stronger statistical evidence for an observed improvement. A final limitation is that a differential privacy mechanism described in Section 6 was not applied in the reported experiments; an evaluation of an accuracy–privacy trade-off at a different ϵ value is an important direction for a future work. 

References 

[1] C. Alcaraz and J. Lopez, “Digital Twin: A comprehensive survey of security threats,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1475– 1503, 2022. [2] Q. Qi et al. , “Enabling technologies and tools for digital twin,” J. Manuf. Syst. , vol. 58, pp. 3–21, 2023. [3] L. U. Khan et al. , “Digital Twin of wireless systems: Overview, tax-onomy, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. ,vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1390–1412, 2022. [4] Y. Zhang, Z. Yan, and W. Ding, “Resource-constrained security for IoMT: Challenges and directions,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 6120–6135, 2024. [5] V. Mothukuri et al. , “A survey on security and privacy of federated learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. , vol. 115, pp. 619–640, 2021. 45 [6] X. Li et al. , “Ransomware detection and mitigation for IoMT using deep learning,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. , vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 3821– 3831, 2023. [7] M. Nawrocki, T. C. Schmidt, and M. Wählisch, “A survey of honeypot software and data analysis,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 1– 36, 2023. [8] J. Zhang et al. , “Federated learning for distributed IIoT intrusion de-tection using transfer approaches,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 8988–8997, 2022. [9] P. Singh et al. , “Federated learning based intrusion detection system for healthcare IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7254–7264, 2023. [10] B. McMahan et al. , “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proc. AISTATS , vol. 54, pp. 1273–1282, 2017. [11] W. Li et al. , “Federated reinforcement learning for adaptive intrusion response in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage. , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1890–1904, 2024. [12] J. Schulman et al. , “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 

arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [13] C. Huang et al. , “Adaptive honeypot for IoMT: Dynamic deception with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security , vol. 19, pp. 4231–4244, 2024. [14] A. S. Qureshi et al. , “Federated Digital Twin security for smart hospitals: Anomaly detection without data sharing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. ,vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2893–2905, 2023. [15] W. Chen et al. , “Blockchain-enabled digital twin for medical device au-thentication in IoMT,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 245–256, 2024. [16] T. Li et al. , “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst. , vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2023. 46 [17] S. P. Karimireddy et al. , “SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning,” in Proc. ICML , vol. 119, pp. 5132–5143, 2021. [18] T. D. Nguyen et al. , “FLAME: Taming backdoors in federated learning,” in Proc. USENIX Security , pp. 1911–1928, 2022. [19] Y. Mirsky et al. , “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online net-work intrusion detection,” in Proc. NDSS , 2018. [20] R. Zhao et al. , “GRU with temporal attention for low-rate DDoS detec-tion in SDN environments,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security , vol. 18, pp. 3071–3083, 2023. [21] I. Ullah and Q. H. Mahmoud, “A two-level flow-based anomaly detection system for IoT networks using a Siamese neural network,” IEEE Access ,vol. 12, pp. 18221–18234, 2024. [22] T. N. Nguyen, Q. D. Ngo, and H. T. Nguyen, “Graph Neural Network for IoT intrusion detection: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3664–3680, 2023. [23] Z. A. Genç, G. Lenzini, and S. E. J. Ryan, “Smart honeypots for IoT: A fuzzy logic approach to adaptive deception,” in Proc. ARES , 2022, pp. 1–10. [24] R. Kumar, S. S. Gill, and R. Buyya, “AI-powered adaptive honeypots for IoT security: A reinforcement learning approach,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. , vol. 138, pp. 131–145, 2023. [25] K. K. Nguyen and V. J. Reddi, “Deep reinforcement learning for cyber security: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2021. [26] Y. Zhou et al. , “DeepFort: Reinforcement learning based DDoS miti-gation for IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage. , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1234–1247, 2023. [27] M. M. Salim et al. , “A blockchain-enabled secure digital twin framework for early botnet detection in IIoT environment,” Sensors , vol. 22, no. 16, p. 5985, 2022. 47 [28] I. A. Khan et al. , “Fed-Inforce-Fusion: A federated reinforcement-based fusion model for security and privacy protection of IoMT networks against cyber-attacks,” Inf. Fusion , vol. 90, pp. 438–452, 2023. [29] I. Sharafaldin et al. , “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset and taxonomy,” in Proc. ICCST , 2019, pp. 1–8. [30] A. Alsaedi et al. , “TON_IoT Telemetry Dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 165130–165150, 2020. [31] S. I. Popoola et al. , “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack detection in IoT-Edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3930–3944, 2022. [32] F. Naeem, M. Ali, and G. Kaddoum, “Federated-learning-empowered semi-supervised active learning framework for intrusion detection in ZSM,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 88–94, 2023. [33] J. Li et al. , “An efficient federated learning system for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Syst. J. , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 4819–4829, 2023. [34] Y. Chen et al. , “FedHealth: A federated transfer learning framework for wearable healthcare,” IEEE Intell. Syst. , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 83–93, 2020. [35] B. Li et al. , “DeepFed: Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, 2021. [36] W. Schneble and G. Thamilarasu, “Attack detection using federated learning in medical cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. ICCCN , 2019, pp. 1–8. [37] T. D. Nguyen et al. , “Dìot: A federated self-learning anomaly detection system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS , 2019, pp. 756–767. [38] M. N. Hossen et al. , “Federated machine learning for detection of skin diseases and enhancement of internet of medical things (IoMT) security,” 

IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. , vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 4982–4991, 2022. 48 [39] Y. Xu et al. , “Feature data processing: Making medical data fit deep neural networks,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. , vol. 109, pp. 149–157, 2020. [40] J. Fan et al. , “Federated learning driven secure internet of medical things,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 68–75, 2022. [41] C. Dwork and A. Roth, “The algorithmic foundations of differential pri-vacy,” Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. , vol. 9, no. 3-4, pp. 211–407, 2014. [42] T. Li et al. , “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. MLSys , vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2020. [43] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,” in Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 30, pp. 4765–4774, 2017. [44] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “ ‘Why should I trust you?’: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. KDD , pp. 1135– 1144, 2016. [45] R. R. Selvaraju et al. , “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep net-works via gradient-based localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis. , vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 336–359, 2020. [46] S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR,” 

Harvard J. Law Technology , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 841–887, 2018. 49