Title: Embedding Inference Attack

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.01276v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:01:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Embedding Inference Attack 

## Cedric Fitiavana Raelijohn and Sébastien Gambs and Jean-Francois Rajotte 

## Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada 

## raelijohn.cedric_fitiavana@courrier.uqam.ca , gambs.sebastien.@uqam.ca ,

## rajotte.jean-francois@uqam.ca 

## Abstract 

Embedding models are essential components of modern Information Retrieval (IR) systems, yet they are typically hidden behind APIs. Re-cent works have shown that dense IR system can lead to security vulnerabilities such as em-bedding inversion attacks. However, such at-tacks usually require that the attacker knows the embedding model for the attack to be appli-cable. In this paper, we study IR systems under a black-box setting in which the adversary ob-serves only the unordered set of retrieved doc-uments, without ranking or similarity scores. We demonstrate that in such contexts, tailored queries allow an adversary to identify which embedding model is in use from a set of known model candidate, which we coin as an em-bedding inference attack (EIA). We also show that certain queries remain discriminative even when the system includes a reranker as a po-tential defense mechanism. We further vali-date our method on a real Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system, in which the tai-lored queries bypass the LLM’s tendency to re-ject inputs it does not recognize as well-formed questions. Finally, we propose and evaluate other mitigation strategies such as similarity thresholds. 

## 1 Introduction 

With the growth of data and the rise of artificial intelligence (AI), IR systems have evolved into modern applications, such as dense (or semantic) IR, in which documents and queries are encoded into vector representations (embeddings vectors) using a neural network, denoted as embedding models (Karpukhin et al., 2020a). This approach enables semantic matching rather than exact key-word matching, significantly improving retrieval performance, especially in large scale datasets. More recently, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as a popular paradigm combin-ing dense retrieval with general-purpose large lan-guage models (LLMs) to generate context-aware responses. This is especially relevant for domain-specific fields such as finance, healthcare and edu-cation (Chang et al., 2024; Arslan et al., 2024). With respect to privacy, embedding vectors are often assumed to be safe to expose because they are only numerical values that do not directly convey an interpretable information for a human. However, recent works have demonstrated the feasibility of conducting embedding inversion attacks, which allow to reconstruct the text represented by em-beddings vectors (Morris et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025a). For instance, this could happen in the com-mon situation in which a RAG system is based on publicly accessible data and is implemented to help users navigate a large set of documents, such as documentation, policies, etc. In this situation, the queries could contain sensitive information such as personal medical conditions. Embedding inver-sion attacks often rely on strong assumptions about the adversary’s capabilities such as access to large sets of leaked text–embedding pairs or knowledge of the victim’s embedding model and architecture (Morris et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025a). We show here how IR systems based on publicly available datasets relaxes these assump-tions, making them more vulnerable to inversion attacks. In this work, we introduce the concept of Embed-ding Inference Attack (EIA), which aims to infer the embedding model used by the target system in a black-box setting in which the adversary has only access to the API of the system. This setting is realistic because embedding models are commonly accessible only through API, for instance in Seman-tic Scholar AI-powered research tool and OpenEvi-dence searching PubMed and medical journals. As a specific use case, we are particularly interested in IR for education in which high school students can ask questions about their homework but might in-advertently leak personal information ( e.g. , name, age or medical conditions of some family mem-

> arXiv:2607.01276v1 [cs.CR] 1 Jul 2026

bers). Knowledge of the embedding model in an IR system such as a RAG can also unlock security vulnerabilities other than inversion attacks, such as corpus poisoning (Zhong et al., 2023), mem-bership inference in a vector database (Anderson et al., 2025) and search-engine optimization (SEO) attacks (Ben-Tov and Sharif, 2024).To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first black-box at-tack aiming to infer the embedding model on IR systems. 

Contributions. Our contributions can be summa-rized as follows. • We propose EIA, a novel approach to infer the embedding model of a black-box IR system. We also show how to instantiate this attack through a set of tailored queries allowing an adversary to identify which embedding model is used from a set of known candidates. • We experimentally validate our method on multiple open-weight embedding models and a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system, in which the tailored queries bypass the LLM’s tendency to reject inputs that do not correspond to well-formed questions. • We demonstrate that certain queries remain discriminative even when the system includes a reranker or uses similarity thresholds as pos-sible mitigation strategies against an EIA. • We showcase the performance of our attack on real-world question-answering (QA) datasets, including MS MARCO and an educational QA dataset collected from Alloprof. 

Outline. The outline of the paper is as follows. First in Section 2, we provide the background no-tions on information retrieval and present the sys-tem and adversary models that we consider before describing the related work on attacks involving the embedding model in Section 3. Afterwards, we introduce our EIA approach and how to implement it by generating discriminative queries in Section 4. Then, we describe the experimental setting in Sec-tion 5 before reporting on the results in Section 6. Finally, we evaluate possible countermeasures in Section 7 before concluding in Section 8 and then discussing the limitations. 

## 2 Background 

In this section, we first provide an overview of information retrieval setting considered before de-scribing the systems and adversary models. 

2.1 Overview of information retrieval Embedding model and information retrieval. 

In a dense IR system (Karpukhin et al., 2020b), queries and documents are converted by an em-bedding model into dense embedding vectors. A desired characteristic for IR is that relevant docu-ments should to be close to a given query in the corresponding embedding space. Conversely, ir-relevant documents to the query should be located farther away. To retrieve the corresponding doc-uments for a given query, similarity measures be-tween their corresponding vectors and the query are computed. Classical similarity measures in-clude the Euclidean distance or cosine similarity, the latter being the most commonly used (Xie et al., 2023). 

Reranker. A reranker is generally a model that is used to refine and re-order the initial set of retrieved documents to achieve better relevance for a given query (Hu et al., 2019). The retrieval pipeline with a reranker generally operates in two phases. First, an initial retrieval step performed typically through embedding models returns a relatively large set of documents ( e.g. , top-50). Second, these doc-uments, along with the query, are then passed to the reranker, which selects the top-k most relevant documents ( e.g. , top-3 or top-5) (Calam, 2023). Rerankers primarily use cross-encoder archi-tectures, in which the query and each docu-ment are concatenated and processed together through a transformer model to produce a relevance score (Calam, 2023; Lu et al., 2025). This contrasts with the embedding models used in the initial re-trieval, which encode queries and documents in-dependently and compute similarity via a distance metric (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). The cross-encoder approach enables deeper semantic under-standing of the query-document relationship ob-tained from the first retrieval stage, as it processes each individual query-document pair ( i.e. , the query paired with each of the top-k retrieved documents) resulting in a more expensive computation, thus ex-plaining the latency tradeoff (Calam, 2023; Pandit et al., 2025). Recently, researchers have demon-strated that large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT and Mistral variants fine-tuned for rank-ing tasks, can also serve as rerankers (Pandit et al., 2025). Rather than directly generating answers, these models evaluate the relevance of candidate documents with respect to a query and can lever-age their stronger reasoning capabilities to improve ranking quality (Sharifymoghaddam et al., 2025). 

2.2 System and adversary models 

We consider a black-box information retrieval sys-tem that is accessible only through an API. In this system, a query, given as a sequence of to-kens q ∈ Vn, is encoded by an embedding model 

ϕ : Vn → Rd into a fixed-length query embedding vector e ∈ Rd. Similarly, the same embedding model ϕ converts a document D ∈ Vn, also repre-sented as a sequence of tokens, into a fixed-length document embedding vector f = ϕ(D) ∈ Rd.The system ranks documents by computing the similarity between the query embedding ei and doc-ument embeddings fj , and returns the top-k most relevant documents (Zeng et al., 2024). Several similarity metrics are commonly used to compare vector representations in information retrieval sys-tem. Cosine similarity is independent of vector magnitude and calculates the cosine of the angle between two vectors. Its value ranges from -1 to 1, with smaller angles corresponding to higher similar-ity. Euclidean (L2) distance, in contrast, calculates the straight-line distance between two points in vector space, in which smaller distances indicate greater similarity. Dot product (inner product) simi-larity is calculated as the product of the two vectors’ magnitudes and the cosine of the angle between them.(Manning et al., 2008b) In this work, we use cosine similarity exclusively, as its insensitivity to vector magnitude is critical when comparing high-dimensional text embeddings of varying length. The objective of the attacker is to infer the em-bedding model ϕv used by the IR system. In this context, the attacker is following the black-box ad-versary setting in which he can only query the vic-tim system with any questions and only has access to the (unranked) retrieved documents. Moreover, similarly to most of the work in the literature we make the following assumptions: 1. The retrieval system uses a publicly available source of documents ( e.g. , Wikipedia) and for a given query qi, it returns a set Si of k

unranked documents, which are outputs that can differ only by the order of documents. For instance, the set d1, d 2, d 3 is considered to be equivalent to d3, d 1, d 2 (Manning et al., 2008a). 2. One of the candidate model is the victim model. This assumption is realistic because several retrieval-system vendors publicly dis-close the embedding models available through their services. For example, OpenAI and Co-here both document their supported embed-ding models and associated API identifiers (OpenAI, 2024; Cohere, 2026). Thus, in these situations the possible set of candidate embed-ding models can be considered to be public information. However in contrast to other previous works, we consider the challenging setting in which the at-tacker does not have access to the embedding vec-tors .

## 3 Related work 

Model stealing. Dziedzic et al. (2023) have shown that it is easy to steal sentence embedding encoders via a black-box API that returns only the vector of the input text and might also expose meta-data including the architecture family ( e.g. , BERT or RoBERTa) and possibly pre-training datasets. Afterwards, the adversary can instantiate a pub-licly available pre-trained transformer checkpoint with the same architecture or at least the same out-put dimensionality and train it with a dataset of sentence pairs drawn from any open-source text distribution. Another work by Tamber et al. (2025) demonstrates that API-only access can be enough to efficiently replicate the effectiveness of com-mercial embedding models by distilling them into local BERT-based models while preserving most retrieval performance. In their work, the attacker only sees input text and output embedding vectors and has unrestricted access to the embedding API. 

Model inference and similarity. Pasquini et al. (2024) have shown how to send very few crafted queries to identify specific LLMs based on their answers. In this context, the attacker can send queries to a victim RAG application and observe the outputs. These outputs are then fed to a sepa-rate ML-based inference model predicting which of 42 candidates LLM versions is generating the answers, achieving over 95% accuracy. Caspari et al. (2024) compares embedding models with various similarity measures in order to help select-ing the most suitable for a given IR or RAG sys-tem. The authors determine pair-wise model simi-larities based on embedding vectors with Central Kernel Alignments (CKA) or resulting document retrieval. The models’ document retrievals are com-pared with and without ranking. Their experiments reveal clear intra - and inter - family clusters when comparing retrieval over large top-k which is es-sentially the full dataset corpus (3 600 document chunks), but show that at realistic RAG settings 

e.g. , top - 10, retrieval similarity between models is low and highly variable, implying that models with similar representations can still surface largely distinct document sets. 

Inversion attacks. Morris et al. (2023) introduce Vec2Text, an embedding inversion attack to recon-struct text produced by embedding models such as OpenAI Text-embedding-ada-002 and gtr-t5-base. In this work, the attacker is assumed to have a large dataset of leaked text–embedding pairs from the target encoder or from another leaked dataset, in which case the attacker needs to train the decoder so that it can generate candidate texts whose em-beddings are close to a given target embedding. Vec2Text frames the inversion attack as a con-trolled generation in which starting from an initial hypothesis, the model iteratively corrects the text by repeatedly re -embedding the current guess with black - box access to the encoder and conditioning on the target embedding, the current embedding and their difference to move the hypothesis in em-bedding space towards the target. Li et al. (2023) have propose GEIA for Gener-ative Embedding Inversion Attack, which uses a conditional language model training to inverse sen-tence embeddings directly. During the training, the decoder is trained by doing teacher forcing, which means that at each step the decoder is fed with the ground -truth of the previous token rather than its own predicted token to learn to reconstruct the orig-inal sentence from its embedding. Here also, the attacker is assumed to have an auxiliary dataset sim-ilar to the distribution of the dataset of the victim and a black-box access in which he can only query the model victim to obtain an text-embedding pairs from his corpus. Huang et al. (2024) have introduced TEIA for Transferable Embedding Inversion Attack, which is an inversion attack that learns a surrogate model of the embedding model victim. The setting is more restricted than other works in the sense that the attacker cannot query or access the embedding model victim but needs to have access to a small leaked set of text-embeddings pairs from it. Huang et al. (2024) re-implemented the GEIA attack as a “Direct Attack” baseline and evaluate both meth-ods on the same datasets and the same embeddings. Across all reported dataset–encoder combinations, TEIA consistently achieves higher reconstruction quality than GEIA in terms of Rouge-L 1 and em-bedding cosine similarity. For example, on QNLI dataset with OpenAI embedding, RougeL improves from 0.1433 to 0.2226 and cosine similarity from 0.2797 to 0.4772. Similarly on AGNEWS dataset, TEIA increases RougeL from 0.0612 to 0.1271 and cosine similarity from 0.1162 to 0.4301. Zhang et al. (2025a) have introduced ZSinvert, a Universal Zero-shot Embedding Inversion attack that does not require prior decoder training but the attacker is assumed to have access to the exact embedding vector and black -box query access to the encoder that produced it. ZSinvert inverts an embedding vector by using an LLM with a mod-ified beam search that directly optimizes cosine similarity between the encoder’s output on candi-date texts and the target embedding. More pre-cisely, it first generates a rough candidate with an open - ended prompt, then repeatedly paraphrases and corrects this candidate while always being guided by the target embedding without ever train-ing an encoder-specific inversion model. Chen et al. (2025) have proposed a few-shot in-version attacks called ALGEN for Alignment and Generation, which aligns the victim embeddings to the attack space and using a generative model to reconstruct the original text. The attacker is assumed to have a small number of leaked embed-ding vectors (without the corresponding original documents) and has black - box access to the vic-tim encoder. The attacker independently trains a separate “local” embedding-to-text generator on public data using their own model. Afterwards, a linear transformation matrix is learned that maps embeddings from the victim’s embedding space to the attacker’s embedding space. Finally, Kim et al. (2026) have introduced Zero2Text, a training - free cross - domain embed-ding inversion. In this setting, the attacker does not need any prior leaked embedding-text pairs from the victim and is assumed to have only a black-box access in which he can query the victim embedding 

> 1Rouge-L is a metric used to evaluate how well the gen-erated summary preserves the ordering and content of the reference (Lin, 2004).

model via its API and see its output. Zero2Text uses a pretrained LLM to generate candidate sen-tences and a dynamically updated linear projection (learned via online ridge regression) to map the attacker’s local embedding space into the victim’s embedding space for scoring and selection. Table 1 summarizes embedding reconstruction attacks according to the attacker capabilities and the underlying attack approach. All attacks require either access to the embedding model or a set of leaked text-embedding pairs. 

## 4 Embedding inference attack description 

For a given query qi, the retrieved documents from the victim Svi and candidate Sci are compared using a Jaccard index, denoted by the following equation: 

Ji = |Svi ∩ Sci ||Svi ∪ Sci | . (1) To perform the EIA, the attacker iteratively queries the retrieval system and compares the returned doc-ument sets. Two embedding models, denoted as ϕc

(candidate) and ϕv (victim), are considered likely to be the same if the Jaccard index is maximized for any question, Ji = 1 , ∀i. However, even if 

ϕc̸ = ϕv, it is possible for the Jaccard index to reach 1 for some queries. This approach trivially extends to a set of model candidates {ϕic} by query-ing until all but one candidate are eliminated. 

Brute-force generation of discriminative queries. 

The attacker can use an LLM to generate a set of questions, one for each document of the document corpus used by the victim system. The generated questions are then used to query the victim model to perform the EIA. To limit the number of API calls on the IR system, the attacker aims to use a question that eliminates all the candidate models. To identify queries that effectively distinguish be-tween candidate models, the attacker compares the retrieved document sets produced by each model. For a given query qi, the similarity between two models is measured using the Jaccard index Ji from equation (1). Queries for which Ji̸ = 1 indicate discrepancies in retrieval are therefore considered potentially discriminative. Let M denote the set of candidate models. For each query qi, we define an elimination score as: 

E(qi) = |{ m ∈ M | J(v,m )

> i

̸ = 1 }| , (2) in which J(v,m ) 

> i

represents the Jaccard index be-tween the victim model v and a candidate model 

m. The elimination score E(qi) corresponds to the number of candidate models whose retrieval differs from the victim model. Intuitively, higher values of 

E(qi) indicate stronger discriminative power. The attacker then selects the subset of queries that max-imizes discrimination across all candidate models. In particular, queries with E(qi) = |M| are ideal, as they allow the attacker to eliminate all incorrect candidates while queries with lower elimination scores are less effective and are discarded directly. A limitation of this brute-force attack is the high number of queries required to generate and test to find a single fully discriminative query. To address this, hereafter we show how to create queries that are discriminative in a more informed manner. 

Generation of adversarial discriminative queries. We have explored three types of adversarial discriminative queries: 1. Random Strings, denoted as Rnd. Str. , which consist of sequences of arbitrary characters, such as for example “fsaduifhsdaifnjklsdan”. These queries allow to explore parts of the embedding space that are not covered by the training of the LLM. 2. Non-Queries, denoted as Non-Q. , are instruc-tions rather than actual questions. An example of Non-Queries is “Short answer only” and the rationale behind them is that they allow to reach parts of the embedding space not related to documents. 3. Probing Queries, denoted as Prob. Q. ,are questions designed to obtain information about the victim system itself. Examples of probing queries include “Who is your devel-oper or creator?” or “Are you an open-source model or a proprietary model?” and their main objective is to investigate areas of the embed-ding that are related to the model. 

## 5 Experimental setting 

5.1 Datasets 

We have used two datasets for our experiments. The first one is the MS MARCO passage develop-ment dataset that was developed by Microsoft to support research in machine reading comprehen-sion and information retrieval (Bajaj et al., 2016). This dataset is built from anonymized real user queries issued to the Bing search engine, paired with passages extracted from web documents. This Attack Encoder access Training Data knowledge Core Idea                          

> Vec2Text (Morris et al., 2023) Black-box ✓Large corpus leak of text–embedding pairs Train an inversion model and iteratively re-fine candidate texts by minimizing embed-ding differences. GEIA (Li et al., 2023) Black-box ✓Asimilar distribution corpus and queried text– embedding pairs Train a conditional language model to di-rectly reconstruct text from embeddings. TEIA (Huang et al., 2024) None ✓Small leaked set of text– embedding pairs Learn a surrogate encoder and perform in-version through transferability. ZSInvert (Zhang et al., 2025a) Black-box ×Target embedding only Use LLM-guided beam search with adver-sarial decoding to optimize embedding simi-larity without training. ALGEN (Chen et al., 2025) Black-box ✓Small set of leaked vic-tim embeddings only Align embedding spaces and reconstruct text using a locally trained generator. Zero2Text (Kim et al., 2026) Black-box ×No leakage Use LLM and online embedding-space pro-jection without training a specific decoder.

Table 1: Attacker assumptions in existing embedding inversion attacks. 

subset contains 7000 queries, 8.8 million passages and 7400 relevance judgments (qrels) that was human-annotated, indicating which documents are considered relevant to each query. We further se-lected only the documents having associated qrels, which leads to a subset of 7400 documents. The second one is an educational ques-tion–answering dataset, created to support the de-velopment and evaluation of question-answering and information retrieval systems in a real-world educational context (Lefebvre-Brossard et al., 2023). It contains questions from K-12 students across different subjects including mathematics, science and geography along with explanatory an-swers provided by educators (which we denote as documents). This dataset is primarily in French, as it is designed for French-speaking students in Québec but a subset includes English queries and documents. We then restrict our experiments to this subset and selected 585 out of 30000 documents. For both datasets, the documents are assumed to be publicly accessible, aligning with the assump-tions of our adversary model in which no private data leakage is required. 

5.2 Information retrieval pipeline 

We evaluated our attack on a controlled IR pipeline hosted on a High Performance Computing cluster, using a single NVIDIA H100 GPU partitioned into two GPU of 40GB instances via NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) technology, along with 64 CPU cores and 64GB of RAM. The full evalua-tion required approximately 8 GPU hours without reranker and 12 – 15 hours when using a reranker. The IR system uses an embedding model to encode both queries and documents before retrieving the top-k documents based on cosine similarity. 

Embedding models. We have used 13 open-source embedding models that we grouped into five families. The E5 models are BERT-based dual encoders trained with large-scale weakly super-vised contrastive learning on query–document pairs for general-purpose text embeddings (Wang et al., 2024). The English SBERT models (all-MiniLM-L6-v2, all-mpnet-base-v2) are Siamese BERT-style dual encoders from the Sentence-Transformers framework, optimized for sentence-level seman-tic similarity and retrieval (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). The multilingual SBERT models, includ-ing LaBSE, employ multilingual Transformer dual encoders trained with translation ranking and con-trastive objectives to yield language-agnostic sen-tence embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019; Feng et al., 2022). gtr-t5-base is a T5 encoder-based dual encoder from the Generalizable T5 Retriever family (Ni et al., 2022), while Qwen3-Embedding-4B from the Qwen3 family is specif-ically designed for text embedding and ranking tasks (Zhang et al., 2025b). All models are lightweight dual encoders or encoder-style architectures commonly used for dense retrieval and semantic similarity, with em-bedding dimensionalities ranging from 384 to 2560. These models were selected based on their wide use in prior work and their suitability for retrieval-oriented evaluation, notably Brown et al. (2025). Table 2 summarizes the models and their embed-ding dimensionalities.                

> Family Model Dim.
> E5 e5-small, e5-small-v2 384 e5-base, e5-base-v2 768 e5-large, e5-large-v2 1024 English SBERT all-MiniLM-L6-v2 384 all-mpnet-base-v2 768 Multilingual SBERT paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2 384 LaBSE 768 paraphrase-multilingual-mpnet-base-v2 768 T5 encoder gtr-t5-base 768 Qwen3 Qwen3-Embedding-4B 2560

Table 2: Open-source embedding models evaluated in our experiments. 

Retrieval parameters and query types. For each model, we retrieve the top-k documents with: 

k = 3 and k = 5. We evaluate four cate-gories of query: generated questions obtained from Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct, Random Strings (Rnd. Str.), Non-Queries (Non-Q.) and Probing Queries (Prob. Q.) manually crafted by the attacker and described previously in Section 4. 

Reranking. We evaluate our EIA performance with (+ reranker) and without reranker. We used the 

cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L6-v2 reranker model and use 25 documents as an initial retrieval. 

5.3 RAG evaluation 

To validate our approach in a more realistic deploy-ment scenario, we conduct additional experiments using an open-source RAG system provided by AnythingLLM 2. AnythingLLM is a free and open-source, all-in-one AI application in which user can host a LLM locally or build their RAG system with-out requiring technical coding background or ex-pensive infrastructure (Mintplex Labs, 2024). The RAG was setup by using three embedding models : all-MiniLM-L6-V2, nomic-embed-text-v1, e5-small as well as one large language model for an-swer generation : Qwen3 Vision 4B instruct. We have chosen k = 3 for document retrieval as well as an optional reranker. For each of the embedding models, documents are stored on LanceDB, which is the default lo-cal vector database of AnythingLLM with a de-fault tokenization of 1000 with an overlap of 20. AnythingLLM have different ways of interact-ing with the documents and the underlying LLM. 

> 2https://github.com/Mintplex-Labs/ anything-llm

More precisely, we evaluated our attack using two interaction modes. In the Chat mode , the LLM combines both the embedded documents and its own general - knowledge base to produce more conversational flexible responses while in the Query mode the system restricts its answers strictly to information retrieved from the embedded documents, treating each interaction as a focused question-and-answer session. 

5.4 Overall evaluation protocol 

We perform a round-robin evaluation over the em-bedding models, in which each model is treated in turn as the victim while the remaining models act as candidates. For each query qi, we compare the retrieved document sets between the victim system and candidate models using the Jaccard index as detailed previously. This allows us to quantify retrieval similarity and identify discrimi-native queries for model inference. We report re-sults across all configurations to analyze (1) the impact of k on model distinguishability, (2) the impact of different query types as well as (3) the effect of reranking on the attack. Table 3 summa-rizes of the different configurations used for the experimentation. 

Setup # Models k

IR Pipeline 13 3, 5 AnythingLLM 3 3

Table 3: Summary of experimental configurations. 

## 6 Results 

In this section, we first review the results of the EIA in the information retrieval pipeline before reporting the success of the attack on the RAG framework. 

6.1 Results on IR Pipeline Discriminative queries. As illustrated in Table 4, 1249 generated queries are sufficient to successfully discriminate among all evaluated models when re-trieving the top three documents ( k = 3 ). Figure 1 shows the distributions of the number of randomly selected questions needed to successfully discrimi-nate. The histograms are produced by repeating the experiment of 1) selecting a document at random, 2) generating a question, 3) filtering out discrimi-nated candidate embedding models and repeating until the victim model is the only candidate left. On average, it usually takes few queries to discriminate the victim model from the candidate ones.  

> (a) MSMarco (b) Alloprof
> Figure 1: Distribution of the number of randomly gen-erated questions needed to infer the embedding model.

Effect of top-k retrieved documents. The num-ber of discriminative queries is directly influenced by the number of retrieved documents k. As shown in Figure 2, decreasing k degrades the attack’s per-formance as a restricted search space limits the op-portunity to retrieve divergent documents across different models. Conversely, increasing k im-proves the inference performance as an expanded retrieval pool naturally amplifies the probability that different models will retrieve distinct docu-ment sets. These results are consistent with that Caspari et al. (2024), who demonstrated that re-trieval similarity decreases with increasing k for low values of k. 

> Figure 2: Effect of top-kon the performance of the attack.

Effect of Reranker. From an attacker’s perspec-tive, the presence and architecture of a reranker in the target system are typically unknown. Neverthe-less, EIA remains effective even in such situation. More precisely as shown in Table 4, when the tar-get system uses a reranker but the candidate models do not, the EIA performance’s improve for all can-didate models when k = 3. Furthermore, as previ-ously explained, increasing the number of retrieved documents enhances the attack’s performance by increasing the probability of models retrieving di-vergent document sets. 

Adversarial discriminative queries. We evalu-ate three types of adversarial discriminative queries as described in Section 4 : (1) Random String de-noted as Rnd. Str., (2) Non-queries denoted as Non-Q and (3) Probing Queries denoted as Prob.Q. As shown in Table 4, all types of adversarial dis-criminative queries successfully discriminate the victim model from the candidate models. Even when the target system employs a reranker, the at-tack remains effective but the number of successful adversarial discriminative queries decreases. 

6.2 Results on RAG 

To evaluate our attack in a realistic RAG envi-ronment, we conducted experiments with Any-thingLLM using the MSMarco dataset. Unlike the controlled IR pipeline experiments, the attacker can only interact with the system through user queries and observe the retrieved document chunks returned by the framework. During the experimen-tation, we first observed that the query mode in AnythingLLM does not apply any retrieval thresh-old filtering unless we add a user-specified similar-ity threshold for the retrieval. As a result, the re-trieval behaviour is the same across different query categories both for query mode or chat mode. 

Random strings and non-queries. For random string queries, the LLM used for the generation generally refused to produce answers as it often interprets the input as random characters or typo-graphical noise. This behaviour was consistently observed across all evaluated LLMs ready-to-use in AnythingLLM, which includes (1) Qwen3 Vi-sion 4B Instruct, (2) Gemma3 1B, (3) Llama3.2 3b, (4) pHI-3.5 3.8B and (5) Mistral 7b. Nonetheless, despite the refusal at the generation level, the re-trieval system still returned top-k document chunks indicating that retrieval was still performed even for inputs that are semantically meaningful. This demonstrates that the retrieval component could remain accessible to the attacker even when the generation model rejects the query. For the non-queries type, we observed differ-ent behaviors depending on whether the input con-tained a question mark. More precisely, when the non-query did not contain a question mark, the gen-eration model typically responds with clarification or refusal messages such as “there is no text content in any of the provided context”. In contrast, when a question mark was added to the same non-query, the generation model often produced generic con-firmation responses such as “yes” or “certainly”. Despite these differences in generated responses, the retrieval system still returned document chunks for all non-query inputs. 

Probing queries. Probing queries successfully triggered both generation and retrieval behaviours, allowing the attacker to observe differences in the retrieved documents across embedding mod-els. The experiments also evaluated the impact of reranking with the AnythingLLM setup. We observed that adversarial discriminative queries re-mained effective when comparing an embedding model with reranking against different embedding models without reranking. The retrieved docu-ment chunks differed sufficiently to discriminate between candidate embedding models.                                             

> Setup Gen. Q. Rnd. Str. Non-Q. Prob. Q.
> (max: 7433) (max: 11) (max: 11) (max: 11) IR 1249 11 11 11 IR + reranker 1860 9711 RAG —11 11 11 RAG + reranker —11 11 11
> Table 4: Discriminative query results for k= 3 .
> Setup Gen. Q. Rnd. Str. Non-Q. Prob. Q.
> (max: 7433) (max: 11) (max: 11) (max: 11) IR 4547 11 11 11 IR + reranker 4877 11 11 11 RAG ————RAG + reranker ————
> Table 5: Discriminative query results for k= 5 .

## 7 Potential defense mechanisms 

Applying a similarity threshold reduces the effec-tiveness of the attack by filtering out retrieved doc-uments that do not exceed the pre-defined thresh-old. Our proposed defence is directly applied to the IR pipeline in which cosine similarity is de-termined between the query embedding and each retrieved document. Documents whose similarity score falls below the predefined threshold are then discarded. As shown in Table 6 for the generated queries, adding a minimum similarity threshold of 0.25 to the IR system had almost no impact as the system still produced 1247 discriminative queries for k = 3 . However, increasing the threshold to 0.6 significantly reduced the number of discriminative queries.                                            

> Thr. 0.25 Thr. 0.50 Thr. 0.60 Thr. 0.75 Query k=3 k=5 k=3 k=5 k=3 k=5 k=3 k=5
> Gen. Q. 1247 4545 580 2244 194 721 835
> Rnd. Str. 99000000
> Non-Q. 10 10 000000
> Prob. Q. 11 11 000000
> Table 6: Effect of similarity retrieval threshold on the IR system.

While a similarity threshold can reduce the ef-fectiveness of EIA, it may also negatively affect retrieval quality by filtering potentially relevant documents. To evaluate this trade-off, we mea-sured retrieval performance on the MS MARCO passage retrieval benchmark using mean recipro-cal rank at 10 and recall at 1000 ( MRR@10 and 

Recall@1000 ) with different similarity thresholds. 

Docs/Retrieval is simply how many documents are returned on average for each query, after applying the similarity threshold. Table 7 shows that the impact of similarity threshold is model-dependent. For larger model such as e5-large-v2 , retrieval effectiveness re-mains the same even at a threshold of 0.75, with MRR@10 and Recall@1000 maintaining their original values. Similarly, gtr-t5-base show small degradation up to a threshold of 0.60. However, 

LaBSE is particularly sensitive to the similarity threshold as shown by the low score on MRR@10 and Recall@1000 dropping from 0.5419 to near zero. For lighter models, such as all-MiniLM-L6-v2 and paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2 ,both MRR@10 and Recall@1000 scores decrease as the threshold increase. These results suggest that even if similarity threshold can significantly reduce the attack, the choice of threshold should be adapted to the retrieval model on the system in order to preserve retrieval performance. Another possible defence mechanism, for RAG system only, consists in hiding the retrieved doc-ument chunks from the user. This aligns with the notion of “retrieved chunk leakage” and “answer leakage” described in Bodea et al. (2026) in which the focus is on preventing sensitive content from being surfaced to end users. While this limits the attacker’s ability to observe retrieved chunks and behaviour, it also reduces system transparency, as users can no longer verify the origin of the gener-ated information. Zhou et al. (2024) survey paper discusses transparency as one of six key dimen-Metric Models 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.60 0.75                                                                            

> MRR@10 e5-large-v2 0.3587 0.3587 0.3587 0.3587 0.3587 gtr-t5-base 0.3494 0.3494 0.3494 0.3494 0.3405 LaBSE 0.0603 0.0603 0.0462 0.0120 0.0005 all-MiniLM-L6-v2 0.3046 0.3046 0.3045 0.2997 0.2092 paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2 0.1957 0.1957 0.1957 0.1945 0.1460 Recall@1000 e5-large-v2 0.9777 0.9777 0.9777 0.9777 0.9777 gtr-t5-base 0.9793 0.9793 0.9793 0.9793 0.7690 LaBSE 0.5419 0.5419 0.1456 0.0173 0.0007 all-MiniLM-L6-v2 0.9653 0.9653 0.9316 0.8178 0.3937 paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2 0.8586 0.8586 0.8421 0.7389 0.3397 Docs/Retrieval e5-large-v2 1000.0 1000.0 1000.0 1000.0 998.6 gtr-t5-base 1000.0 1000.0 1000.0 999.5 36.8 LaBSE 1000.0 999.7 47.3 1.0 0.0 all-MiniLM-L6-v2 1000.0 1000.0 435.8 132.7 11.9 paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2 1000.0 1000.0 835.2 357.3 29.7

Table 7: Effect of similarity threshold on retrieval performance. 

sions of trustworthiness in RAG systems, defined as: “Making RAG system processes and decisions clear and understandable to users, fostering trust and accountability” .Finally, one could introduce noise into the re-trieved set by adding random or synthetic docu-ments. Although this may obscure the retrieval patterns exploited by the attacker, it might also neg-atively impact the quality and relevance of a RAG system’s responses. Cuconasu et al. (2024) shows that random documents and semantically related but non -relevant document that do not contain the answer (called distractors) can possibly alter model behaviour risking reduced answer quality and ac-curacy. 

## 8 Conclusion 

In this work, we have proposed a novel attack called an embedding inference attack by which an adversary can infer the embedding model used by an information retrieval system. This knowl-edge is often necessary to conduct embedding in-version attacks and can even unlock other privacy vulnerabilities. Our primary motivation is the in-version of user queries, which may reveal private or sensitive information about the user. The at-tack assumes access to the document collection used by the retrieval system, which is realistic as many IR applications rely on publicly available documents, as well as access to a set of candidate embedding models, which is also realistic because many systems use open-source embedding models or publicly available APIs rather than embedding models developed in a private manner. 

## 9 Limitations 

This work presents some limitations that could be addressed in future research. First, our evaluation does not investigate the impact of document chunk size and chunk overlap on the effectiveness of the attack. Since these parameters directly influence the retrieval process in RAG systems, studying their effect could provide a better understanding of the robustness of different configurations. In addition, our experiments mainly focus on open-source embedding models. Future work will ex-tend the evaluation of the EIA to closed-source and proprietary systems, such as models provided by companies such as OpenAI or Google in order to assess whether the attack remains effective in such settings. 

## References 

Maya Anderson, Guy Amit, and Abigail Goldsteen. 2025. Is my data in your retrieval database? mem-bership inference attacks against retrieval augmented generation. International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy , 2:474–485. Publisher Copyright: © 2025 by SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda.; 11th International Conference on Information Systems Security and Pri-vacy, ICISSP 2025 ; Conference date: 20-02-2025 Through 22-02-2025. Muhammad Arslan, Hussam Ghanem, Saba Munawar, and Christophe Cruz. 2024. A survey on rag with llms. Procedia Computer Science , 246:3781–3790. 28th International Conference on Knowledge Based and Intelligent information and Engineering Systems (KES 2024). Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Majumder, An-drew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Alina Stoica, Saurabh Tiwary, and Tong Wang. 2016. Ms marco: A human gen-erated machine reading comprehension dataset. In 

InCoCo@NIPS .Matan Ben-Tov and Mahmood Sharif. 2024. Gaslite-ing the retrieval: Exploring vulnerabilities in dense embedding-based search. Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-nications Security .Andreea-Elena Bodea, Stephen Meisenbacher, Alexan-dra Klymenko, and Florian Matthes. 2026. Sok: Pri-vacy risks and mitigations in retrieval-augmented gen-eration systems. Preprint , arXiv:2601.03979. Andrew Brown, Muhammad Roman, and Barry De-vereux. 2025. A systematic literature review of retrieval-augmented generation: Techniques, metrics, and challenges. Big Data and Cognitive Computing ,9(12). James Calam. 2023. Rerankers and two-stage retrieval. 

Pinecone Learn .Laura Caspari, Kanishka Ghosh Dastidar, Saber Zer-houdi, Jelena Mitrovic, and Michael Granitzer. 2024. Beyond benchmarks: Evaluating embedding model similarity for retrieval augmented generation sys-tems. In Proceedings of the Workshop Information Retrieval’s Role in RAG Systems (IR-RAG 2024) co-located with the 47th International ACM SIGIR Con-ference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2024), Washington DC, USA, 07 18, 2024 , CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pages 62–70. CEUR-WS.org. Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, Wei Ye, Yue Zhang, Yi Chang, Philip S. Yu, Qiang Yang, and Xing Xie. 2024. A survey on evaluation of large language mod-els. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. , 15(3). Yiyi Chen, Qiongkai Xu, and Johannes Bjerva. 2025. ALGEN: Few-shot inversion attacks on textual em-beddings via cross-model alignment and generation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 24330–24348, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Cohere. 2026. Cohere’s embed models (details and application). Accessed: 2026-06-03. Florin Cuconasu, Giovanni Trappolini, Federico Sicil-iano, Simone Filice, Cesare Campagnano, Yoelle Maarek, Nicola Tonellotto, and Fabrizio Silvestri. 2024. Rethinking relevance: How noise and dis-tractors impact retrieval-augmented generation. In 

Proceedings of the 14th Italian Information Retrieval Workshop (IIR 2024) . CEUR-WS. Adam Dziedzic, Franziska Boenisch, Mingjian Jiang, Haonan Duan, and Nicolas Papernot. 2023. Sentence embedding encoders are easy to steal but hard to defend. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Pitfalls of limited data and computation for Trustworthy ML .Fangxiaoyu Feng, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Naveen Ari-vazhagan, and Wei Wang. 2022. Language-agnostic BERT sentence embedding. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 878–891, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Minghao Hu, Yuxing Peng, Zhen Huang, and Dong-sheng Li. 2019. Retrieve, read, rerank: Towards end-to-end multi-document reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2285– 2295, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yu-Hsiang Huang, Yuche Tsai, Hsiang Hsiao, Hong-Yi Lin, and Shou-De Lin. 2024. Transferable embed-ding inversion attack: Uncovering privacy risks in text embeddings without model queries. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 4193–4205, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020a. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769– 6781, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick SH Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020b. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In 

EMNLP (1) , pages 6769–6781. Doohyun Kim, Donghwa Kang, Kyungjae Lee, Hyeongboo Baek, and Brent Byunghoon Kang. 2026. Zero2text: Zero-training cross-domain in-version attacks on textual embeddings. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.01757. Antoine Lefebvre-Brossard, Stephane Gazaille, and Michel C. Desmarais. 2023. Alloprof: a new french question-answer education dataset and its use in an information retrieval case study. CoRR ,abs/2302.07738. Haoran Li, Mingshi Xu, and Yangqiu Song. 2023. Sen-tence embedding leaks more information than you expect: Generative embedding inversion attack to recover the whole sentence. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 14022–14040, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-tion Branches Out , pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yang Lu, Yue Chen, and Carsten Eickhoff. 2025. Cross-encoder rediscovers a semantic variant of bm25. 

arXiv preprint .Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-rich Schütze. 2008a. Evaluation of unranked re-trieval sets , chapter 8. Cambridge University Press. Section 8.2. Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-rich Schütze. 2008b. Scoring, term weighting, and the vector space model , chapter 6. Cambridge Uni-versity Press. Mintplex Labs. 2024. Anythingllm: A full-stack appli-cation that turns any document, resource, or content into context that any llm can use as references during chatting. https://github.com/mintplex-labs/ anything-llm . Accessed: 2026-04-29. John Morris, Volodymyr Kuleshov, Vitaly Shmatikov, and Alexander Rush. 2023. Text embeddings reveal (almost) as much as text. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 12448–12460, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Zhao, Yi Luan, Keith Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, and Yinfei Yang. 2022. Large dual encoders are generalizable retrievers. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9844–9855, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2024. New embedding models and api updates. Accessed: 2026-06-03. Tejul Pandit, Sakshi Mahendru, Meet Raval, and Dhvani Upadhyay. 2025. The evolution of reranking models in information retrieval: From heuristic methods to large language models. CLNLP’25 , page 15. Dario Pasquini, Evgenios M. Kornaropoulos, and Giuseppe Ateniese. 2024. Llmmap: Fingerprinting for large language models. ArXiv , abs/2407.15847. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Sahel Sharifymoghaddam, Ronak Pradeep, Andre Slavescu, Ryan Nguyen, Andrew Xu, Zijian Chen, Yilin Zhang, Yidi Chen, Jasper Xian, and Jimmy Lin. 2025. Rankllm: A python package for reranking with llms. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’25, page 3681–3690, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Manveer Singh Tamber, Jasper Xian, and Jimmy Lin. 2025. Can’t hide behind the API: Stealing black-box commercial embedding models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 1958–1969, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binx-ing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Ma-jumder, and Furu Wei. 2024. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. Preprint ,arXiv:2212.03533. Xingrui Xie, Han Liu, Wenzhe Hou, and Hongbin Huang. 2023. A brief survey of vector databases. In 2023 9th International Conference on Big Data and Information Analytics (BigDIA) , pages 364–371. Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Pengfei He, Yiding Liu, Yue Xing, Han Xu, Jie Ren, Yi Chang, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2024. The good and the bad: Exploring privacy issues in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 4505–4524, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Collin Zhang, John X. Morris, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2025a. Universal zero-shot embedding inversion. 

ArXiv , abs/2504.00147. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025b. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .Zexuan Zhong, Ziqing Huang, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Poisoning retrieval corpora by in-jecting adversarial passages. ArXiv , abs/2310.19156. Yujia Zhou, Yan Liu, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Hongjin Qian, Zheng Liu, Chaozhuo Li, Zhicheng Dou, Tsung-Yi Ho, and Philip S. Yu. 2024. Trustworthiness in retrieval-augmented generation systems: A survey. 

ArXiv , abs/2409.10102.