Title: Efficient and Privacy Aware Edge Cloud Collaborative Inference for Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13093v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 00:05:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# EFFICIENT AND PRIVACY -A WARE EDGE -C LOUD 

# COLLABORATIVE INFERENCE FOR LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 

Yi Li Chen Li Jiexiong Liu 

KunlunMeta 

# ABSTRACT 

Large language model (LLM) inference on user-facing devices must balance interactive latency, limited local compute resources, and privacy exposure from user inputs and dialogue histories. Pure cloud inference provides abundant compute but exposes raw prompts and long-context identifiers to a remote service, whereas pure on-device inference is often infeasible for consumer CPUs, mobile GPUs, and embedded edge devices. This paper presents a privacy-aware edge–cloud collaborative inference framework derived from an endpoint-authorized KV-cache workflow. The endpoint per-forms input preprocessing, embedding computation, device-adaptive feature preparation, KV-cache authorization, speculative decoding, and a low-dimensional component of the language-model head. The cloud executes authorized decoder-layer inference, maintains the KV cache, validates specu-lative tokens, and computes the high-dimensional component of the vocabulary projection. The endpoint then fuses partial logits, applies language-adaptive vocabulary masking, and samples the next token. To reduce practical exposure during collaboration, tensor payloads and clipped logits are quantized and protected with AES-GCM in transit, while LoRA-adapted lightweight modules, draft-module parameters, and cache-access decisions remain local to the endpoint. The framework supports CPU-only devices through block-wise streaming, GPU-equipped devices through local batching and sliced lightweight modules, and embedded devices through quantized ONNX Runtime deployment. We implement a prototype and evaluate it across heterogeneous endpoint profiles under controlled network conditions. The proposed framework reduces per-token latency by up to 46.1% over naive split inference and reduces language-specific downlink payloads by up to 67.4% compared with full-logits transfer, while maintaining task-level metrics within a small margin of the full cloud target model in our prototype evaluation. 

Keywords Large Language Models · Edge–Cloud Inference · Privacy-Aware Inference · KV Cache · Speculative Decoding · LoRA · ONNX Runtime 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have become a core component of interactive applications such as personal assistants, enterprise copilots, industrial monitoring interfaces, and in-vehicle dialogue systems. These applications increasingly require LLM inference to operate close to end users, where inputs and dialogue histories may contain sensitive information and where interactive latency strongly affects usability. However, deploying the full model locally is often impractical. Pure CPU devices may lack sufficient matrix-computation throughput; GPU-equipped endpoints may have limited memory and must support multiple concurrent sessions; and embedded edge devices require cross-platform runtime compatibility and aggressive model compression. A common engineering solution is to offload inference to the cloud. Cloud-only serving, however, requires transmitting user inputs, history identifiers, or long-context state to a remote server. This creates privacy risks and increases communication overhead. Existing split-inference systems can reduce local computation, but they often lack fine-grained control of the KV cache, device-specific adaptation for CPU/GPU/edge endpoints, and a combined protection strategy for both conventional network security and hidden-state leakage. arXiv:2607.13093v1 [cs.CR] 14 Jul 2026 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference This paper proposes an edge–cloud collaborative inference architecture for LLMs. The central idea is to keep privacy-sensitive decisions and lightweight computation on the endpoint, while moving heavyweight decoder computation to the cloud under endpoint-controlled cache authorization. The endpoint generates embeddings, configures cache usage, computes a lightweight local projection, performs speculative decoding, and fuses cloud-returned partial logits. The cloud receives feature tensors rather than raw text, performs authorized decoder inference, computes the remaining high-dimensional projection, and verifies speculative predictions. Communication is reduced through language-adaptive vocabulary pruning and device-adaptive tensor transmission. The main contributions are as follows: • We present a collaborative LLM inference workflow in which the endpoint controls KV-cache usage and avoids transmitting raw prompts, plaintext history identifiers, or complete output distributions. Unlike conventional split inference, the cache policy is explicitly controlled by the privacy-sensitive endpoint. • We introduce a distributed vocabulary-projection design that splits the classifier head by hidden-state di-mensions, enabling the endpoint to compute a low-dimensional local component while the cloud computes the high-dimensional component without returning a complete logits distribution when language-restricted generation is enabled. • We integrate speculative decoding with endpoint–cloud verification so that accepted draft tokens can reduce repeated interaction rounds and cloud-side decoding work. • We describe a heterogeneous deployment strategy for pure CPU, GPU-equipped, and edge devices, including block-wise streaming, model slicing, tensor parallelism, and ONNX Runtime execution. • We combine AES-GCM transport protection, endpoint-local LoRA modules, and explicit cache authorization to reduce communication-level and hidden-state exposure. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Efficient LLM Serving 

Modern LLM serving systems rely heavily on batching, memory-efficient attention, and KV-cache management. PagedAttention and related systems improve serving throughput by reducing memory fragmentation and efficiently reusing key–value states [ 1]. Orthogonal systems work improves attention kernels, continuous batching, and distributed inference execution through FlashAttention, FlashAttention-2, ORCA, and DeepSpeed-Inference [ 2, 3, 4 , 5]. These techniques are primarily designed for datacenter serving, whereas our setting gives the endpoint explicit authority over whether and how much historical KV cache may be used and how much information is exposed during each generation step. 

2.2 Split and Edge–Cloud Inference 

Split computing moves different parts of a neural network across the endpoint and the cloud. Earlier collaborative-intelligence systems, such as Neurosurgeon, studied layer placement between mobile devices and cloud servers [ 6]. Split-computing surveys and layer-partitioning systems further characterize latency, bandwidth, and heterogeneous-device trade-offs [ 7, 8, 9]. Recent LLM-oriented edge–cloud approaches study hybrid small/large models, collaborative edge inference, and split speculative decoding [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 ]. For LLMs, the large decoder stack, the vocabulary projection, and the KV cache introduce new bottlenecks. Our framework therefore splits not only model layers but also cache access, vocabulary projection, speculative decoding, and device-specific transmission logic, with privacy exposure as a first-class design objective. 

2.3 Speculative Decoding 

Speculative decoding accelerates autoregressive generation by using a smaller draft model to propose future tokens, which are then verified by a larger target model [ 16 , 17 ]. Later work extends this idea with tree-based verification, hardware-aware draft trees, multiple decoding heads, lookahead decoding, knowledge-distilled draft models, and self-speculative decoding [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ]. In the proposed collaborative framework, the endpoint hosts a lightweight speculative module. The cloud validates draft tokens and updates the KV cache, allowing accepted tokens to reduce interaction rounds without exposing the full endpoint-side module parameters. 2Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

2.4 Parameter-Efficient Adaptation and Privacy 

LoRA introduces trainable low-rank matrices into pretrained models and enables parameter-efficient adaptation while keeping backbone weights frozen [ 26 ]. Quantized LoRA, split LoRA, and privacy-oriented LoRA variants demonstrate that low-rank adaptation can be combined with compression, split learning, and privacy-aware training protocols [ 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]. Distributed and locally protected LLM inference has also been studied using alternative privacy mechanisms such as local differential privacy and distributed secure inference [ 33 , 34 ]. We use LoRA-adapted lightweight modules on the endpoint. Their weights remain local, which increases the difficulty of reconstructing transferred hidden states through model-parameter enumeration. This is not a formal differential-privacy guarantee, but it provides a practical system-level protection layer when combined with encrypted transport and restricted cache authorization. 

# 3 System Overview 

Figure 1 shows the proposed architecture. The endpoint and cloud communicate through encrypted and quantized tensor messages. The endpoint is responsible for user-facing preprocessing, language identification, embedding computation, cache-control parameter generation, local partial inference, speculative decoding, and final token sampling. The cloud is responsible for authorized decoder inference, KV-cache maintenance, speculative-token verification, and high-dimensional partial logits computation. 

Figure 1: Overview of the edge–cloud collaborative LLM inference framework. The endpoint keeps privacy-sensitive control and lightweight computation local, while the cloud performs authorized decoder inference and high-dimensional projection. The framework operates under three design principles. First, the endpoint controls whether the cloud may use historical KV-cache entries and how many entries are authorized. Second, raw user inputs and complete logits distributions are not transmitted during generation. Third, device-specific execution paths are selected according to endpoint capability: block-wise streaming for pure CPU endpoints, model slicing for GPU endpoints, and ONNX Runtime for resource-constrained edge devices. 3Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

# 4 Threat Model and Design Goals 

We target deployment scenarios in which the endpoint is controlled by the user or by a trusted local application, while the cloud is operated by a service provider that follows the protocol but may be curious about user content. The cloud is therefore allowed to observe decrypted feature tensors that are required for authorized inference, cloud-side partial logits, token-level verification metadata, and cache-control parameters. It should not receive raw prompts, plaintext conversation-history identifiers, endpoint-local LoRA weights, or complete endpoint-side lightweight-module parameters. Network attackers may observe, replay, or modify packets, but they do not know the authenticated-encryption keys. The design is not a substitute for secure multi-party computation, homomorphic encryption, trusted execution, or formal differential privacy. Instead, it pursues four system-level goals. First, the endpoint should explicitly authorize whether historical KV-cache states may be used and how many entries are exposed to a generation step. Second, communication should avoid transmitting raw text and full vocabulary distributions whenever a language-specific subset is sufficient. Third, endpoint-local lightweight modules should reduce the information available to an adversary who only observes cloud-side tensors. Fourth, the design should preserve practical deployability on CPU-only clients, GPU-equipped endpoints, and embedded edge devices. 

# 5 Method 

5.1 Notation 

Let x denote a user input sequence and T (·) denote tokenization. The endpoint maps x to token indices u = T (x) and then computes an initial hidden representation 

h0 = Etok (u) + Epos (p) + Etype (t), (1) where Etok , Epos , and Etype are token, positional, and type embeddings, respectively. The hidden dimension is denoted by D and the vocabulary size by V .The endpoint also creates an inference-control tuple 

c = (flag Cache , L Cache , d type , ℓ ), (2) where flag Cache indicates whether historical KV-cache entries may be used, LCache is the authorized cache length, 

dtype describes the endpoint type, and ℓ is the language identifier. The identifier ℓ may be estimated from the prompt or set by user preference, for example Chinese-only, English-only, or mixed-language generation. 

5.2 Device-Adaptive Feature Preparation 

The endpoint adapts the initial feature tensor according to hardware capability. The design is compatible with common model-compression techniques for edge deployment, including post-training quantization, activation-aware quantization, pruning, distillation, and CPU-oriented inference optimization [35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40]. 

Pure CPU endpoints. For CPU-only devices, the feature tensor is partitioned by columns into Nb blocks: 

h0 = concat( h(1) 0 , h (2) 0 , . . . , h (Nb)0 ). (3) Each block is transmitted with an order identifier and integrity metadata. This enables streaming: the endpoint can decrypt and process block k while receiving block k + 1 , hiding part of the network latency behind local computation. 

GPU-equipped endpoints. For endpoints with GPU acceleration, the local modules may be sliced by Transformer layer or attention head. A lightweight serving engine can use tensor parallelism and multi-session batching to accelerate embedding, speculative decoding, and local projection. 

Edge devices. For embedded or IoT-class devices, endpoint modules are exported to ONNX and executed through ONNX Runtime. Quantization can be selected according to the available memory budget. The ONNX execution path also allows hardware-specific execution providers, such as vector instructions or neural-processing accelerators, to be used when available. 4Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

5.3 Authorized Cloud Decoder Inference 

The cloud receives the adapted feature tensor and the endpoint-generated control tuple. If cache usage is authorized, the cloud selects at most LCache historical KV entries for the current session. Otherwise, it ignores existing cache entries and performs decoding from the transmitted feature tensor. This endpoint-controlled cache interface is complementary to KV-cache compression and streaming-cache management methods [41, 42]. For a decoder layer, the cloud computes 

Q = hW Q, (4) 

K = concat( K1: LCache  

> Cache

, hW K ), (5) 

V = concat( V 1: LCache  

> Cache

, hW V ), (6) 

a = softmax 

 QK ⊤

√dk

+ M



V, (7) 

h′ = FFN( a), (8) where WQ, WK , and WV are projection matrices, M is the autoregressive attention mask, and h′ is the cloud-produced hidden state before the final vocabulary projection. For CPU endpoints, the returned hidden state can be partitioned according to the same block rule and streamed back. For GPU and edge endpoints, the cloud returns the complete hidden state. All returned tensors are quantized and encrypted before transmission. 

5.4 Distributed Vocabulary Projection 

The final language-model head is expensive because it maps each hidden vector to a distribution over a large vocabulary. Let the full output projection be 

z = h′Wlm + b, Wlm ∈ RD×V , b ∈ RV . (9) The framework splits both the hidden vector and the corresponding rows of the LM-head weight matrix along the hidden dimension: h′ = concat( hend , h cloud ), Dend + Dcloud = D, Wlm =

 Wend 

Wcloud 



, (10) where Wend ∈ RDend ×V and Wcloud ∈ RDcloud ×V . The endpoint computes 

zend = hend Wend , (11) while the cloud computes 

zcloud = hcloud Wcloud + b. (12) The endpoint then reconstructs the logits by element-wise addition: 

z = zend + zcloud . (13) For language-restricted generation, the cloud does not return all V dimensions. The endpoint determines a vocabulary subset Vℓ from the language identifier ℓ and sends only the subset identifier or a compact subset mask to the cloud. The cloud returns zcloud [Vℓ] after clipping, quantization, and encryption. The endpoint computes the matching local component zend [Vℓ], fuses the two partial logits, and assigns −∞ to all dimensions outside Vℓ:

˜zi =

zend ,i + zcloud ,i , i ∈ V ℓ,

−∞ , i / ∈ V ℓ. (14) The next token is sampled from 

p(yt | y<t , x ) = softmax(˜ z/τ ), (15) where τ is the sampling temperature. In mixed-language mode, Vℓ is set to the complete vocabulary or to the union of selected language subsets. This formulation makes explicit that both partial projections have vocabulary-dimensional outputs and that the bias term is applied exactly once. 5Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

5.5 Endpoint Speculative Decoding and Cloud Verification 

The endpoint contains a lightweight draft module gϕ implemented as either an MLP or a small Transformer block followed by an MLP. Given the cloud-returned hidden state, the module proposes N future tokens: 

st = gϕ(h′

> t

), (16) 

ˆyt:t+N −1 = arg max Proj( st). (17) The draft length N is device-dependent: CPU and edge endpoints use shorter drafts to control local compute, while GPU-equipped endpoints use longer drafts to reduce interaction rounds. For each generation step, the endpoint sends the sampled incremental token and the proposed draft sequence to the cloud. The cloud verifies the draft tokens with the target decoder under the endpoint-authorized KV-cache window. Accepted draft tokens are committed to the cloud-side KV cache and reused in subsequent steps; rejected draft tokens trigger recomputation from the last accepted position. This verification keeps the cloud KV cache consistent with the authoritative target model. Because quantization, language masking, and endpoint-side approximation can slightly change the sampling distribution, the workflow should be regarded as approximately target-preserving rather than strictly distribution-preserving. Figure 2 summarizes the generation loop in a compact form. 

Figure 2: Autoregressive generation loop with endpoint-controlled KV-cache usage, split logits computation, language-adaptive masking, and cloud-side speculative-token verification. 

Algorithm 1 Endpoint-authorized collaborative decoding 

Require: user input x, endpoint type dtype , maximum response length T 

> 1:

Endpoint tokenizes x, computes h0, detects language identifier ℓ, and sets (flag Cache , L Cache ). 

> 2:

Endpoint prepares h0 according to dtype and sends encrypted tensor blocks plus the control tuple to the cloud.  

> 3:

Cloud performs authorized decoder inference and returns encrypted hidden states or hidden-state blocks.  

> 4:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 5:

Endpoint computes zend [Vℓ] and draft tokens ˆyt:t+N −1. 

> 6:

Cloud computes and returns zcloud [Vℓ] under the authorized cache window.  

> 7:

Endpoint fuses partial logits, applies language masking, and samples yt. 

> 8:

Endpoint sends yt and ˆyt:t+N −1 to the cloud for verification.  

> 9:

Cloud commits accepted tokens, recomputes from the first rejected token if necessary, and updates the KV cache.  

> 10:

if an end-of-sequence token or stopping rule is reached then  

> 11:

break  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Endpoint decodes the generated token sequence and returns the final response. 6Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

5.6 Transport Protection and Hidden-State Protection 

The system combines network-level authenticated encryption with endpoint-local model-state protection. The scope of each layer follows the threat model in Section 4. 

Encrypted tensor transmission. Before transmission, tensor elements are quantized to a configurable bit width b:

q = Qb(r), (18) where r denotes a real-valued tensor element or vector. The quantized payload is encrypted with AES-GCM [43]: 

C = AES -GCM K, IV (q, aad) , (19) where K is a pre-shared or derived key, IV is a nonce, and aad contains authenticated session, block, and cache-control metadata. CPU-block mode assigns independent nonces to different tensor blocks, while GPU and edge modes assign nonces by session and message type. AES-GCM protects payloads against network-level eavesdropping and tampering; it does not prevent the authorized cloud from observing decrypted tensors that are required for cloud-side inference. Compared with cryptographic transformer inference based on secure multi-party computation, homomorphic encryption, or trusted execution environments [ 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ], our design uses conventional authenticated encryption for transport and treats endpoint-local modules as a practical exposure-reduction mechanism rather than as a formal secure-computation protocol. 

Endpoint-local LoRA modules. The endpoint lightweight modules are adapted with LoRA [ 26 ]. For a base weight 

W0, LoRA introduces a low-rank update 

W = W0 + ∆ W, ∆W = BA, (20) where A ∈ Rr×d and B ∈ Rd×r are trainable low-rank matrices. During adaptation, the base model is frozen and only the LoRA parameters are updated. The adapted lightweight weights, draft-module parameters, and local projection weights remain on the endpoint and are not transmitted to the cloud. This limits the model information available to a cloud-side inversion attempt, although it is not a formal cryptographic or differential-privacy guarantee. 

KV-cache authorization. The endpoint controls flag Cache and LCache . A new session can disable cache reuse, while an ongoing session can reduce the authorized cache window when privacy requirements are high. The cloud maintains physical KV-cache entries for efficiency, but each generation request includes an endpoint-generated authorization tuple that determines whether those entries may be used. 

# 6 Implementation Considerations 

6.1 Device Profiles 

Table 1 summarizes the main execution modes. Table 1: Device-adaptive execution profiles. Endpoint type Local execution strategy Communication strategy Pure CPU Block-wise embedding, lightweight MLP, local draft module, SIMD-friendly matrix multiplication Stream hidden-state blocks, overlap decryp-tion and computation, use per-block in-tegrity metadata GPU-equipped Model slicing, tensor parallelism, lo-cal batching, multi-session scheduling Transmit complete hidden states, use session-level encryption and batched re-quests Edge device Quantized ONNX Runtime execution [ 48 ], hardware execution providers, compact draft module Use quantized tensors, avoid redundant for-mat conversion, support low-memory exe-cution 

6.2 Language-Adaptive Logits Compression 

Language-adaptive masking reduces the size of returned logits when generation is restricted to a target language. In a Chinese-only or English-only mode, only the corresponding vocabulary subset must be transmitted and fused. In mixed-language mode, the full vocabulary or a union of language subsets can be retained. The subset mapping can be precomputed from tokenizer metadata and updated when the model vocabulary changes. 7Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference 

6.3 Failure Handling 

If cache authorization fails or the cloud does not find a valid session cache, the system falls back to cache-free decoding. If a CPU block is lost or fails integrity verification, the cloud retransmits that block. If speculative verification fails, the cloud recomputes from the last accepted token and updates the cache with the corrected state. 

# 7 Experimental Evaluation 

This section evaluates the proposed edge–cloud collaborative inference framework against conventional serving strategies. We implemented a prototype with a PyTorch cloud decoder, an endpoint runtime for local embed-ding/projection/draft modules, QUIC-based message transport, 8-bit tensor quantization, and AES-GCM authenticated encryption. The evaluation includes latency, throughput, communication volume, component ablations, sensitivity analyses, generation quality, and privacy-exposure accounting. 

7.1 Research Questions 

The evaluation is organized around four questions: • RQ1: Does the proposed collaborative workflow reduce end-to-end generation latency compared with cloud-only and conventional split-inference baselines? • RQ2: How much communication volume is saved by split vocabulary projection and language-adaptive logits compression? • RQ3: Which components contribute most to latency, throughput, and bandwidth improvements? • RQ4: What privacy-relevant information remains visible under different serving strategies? 

7.2 Baselines 

We compare the proposed framework with four baselines. • Cloud-only: the endpoint sends the raw prompt and a conversation identifier to the cloud; the cloud performs all prefill and decoding and returns text tokens. • Cloud-only encrypted transport: the same workflow as cloud-only, but the request and response payloads are protected in transit. This baseline protects the network channel but does not reduce cloud-side visibility. • Naive split inference: the endpoint computes embeddings and the cloud returns hidden states or full logits without endpoint-controlled cache authorization, language-adaptive logits clipping, or endpoint-side speculative decoding. • Endpoint-only lightweight: a compact local model performs generation without cloud assistance. This baseline is feasible only for the GPU and edge profiles and illustrates the quality–efficiency trade-off of pure local inference. 

7.3 Experimental Setup 

We instantiate the target model as a 7B-class decoder-only Transformer with hidden size D = 4096 and vocabulary size V = 150 ,000 , matching the split dimensions used by the collaborative design. The endpoint processes Dend = 96 

hidden dimensions, and the cloud processes Dcloud = 4000 dimensions. Unless otherwise stated, prompts are truncated or padded to 512 input tokens and responses are generated for 128 tokens. Tensor payloads and clipped logits are quantized to 8 bits before AES-GCM encryption. Chinese-only generation keeps 40% of the vocabulary, English-only generation keeps 30%, and mixed-language generation keeps the full vocabulary. Table 2 summarizes the deployment profiles. The cloud server hosts the full decoder stack, maintains KV-cache entries, verifies speculative tokens, and computes the cloud-side LM-head projection. The CPU endpoint uses Nb = 4 streamed blocks and a rank-4 LoRA local module. The GPU endpoint uses a rank-8 local module, local batching, and speculative length N = 5 . The edge endpoint uses an 8-bit ONNX Runtime module and speculative length N = 2 .8Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference Table 2: Prototype hardware and runtime configuration.           

> Profile Hardware Runtime configuration Cloud NVIDIA H20 96GB GPU, 64 vCPU host, 512GB RAM PyTorch decoder service, KV-cache manager, partial LM-head projection, QUIC endpoint CPU endpoint 12-core x86 CPU, 32GB RAM, no discrete GPU SIMD matrix kernels, four streamed tensor blocks, rank-4 LoRA module GPU endpoint Consumer GPU with 8GB VRAM, 32GB host RAM Local batching, sliced lightweight modules, rank-8 LoRA module, draft length N= 5
> Edge endpoint Embedded ARM device with 8GB unified memory ONNX Runtime, 8-bit quantized lightweight modules, draft length N= 2

All endpoint–cloud experiments use a controlled network with 20 ms round-trip latency, 2 ms jitter, and a 100 Mbps bandwidth limit. We evaluate 1,000 prompts: 400 Chinese prompts, 400 English prompts, and 200 mixed-language prompts. Each configuration is repeated five times after 100 warm-up prompts; tables report the mean and, where space permits, the standard deviation. The cloud service runs on Ubuntu 22.04 with CUDA 12.4 and PyTorch 2.4. Endpoint components use Python 3.10, ONNX Runtime 1.18 for the embedded profile, and a QUIC/HTTP3 transport layer implemented with user-space message framing. Cloud-side decoding uses bf16 weights, while transmitted tensors and clipped logits use INT8 payloads unless otherwise specified. Latency includes endpoint tokenization, embedding, quantization, AES-GCM encryption/decryption, network transfer, cloud decoding, partial projection, draft verification, logits fusion, sampling, and KV-cache update. Model loading and first-time runtime initialization are excluded. 

7.4 Metrics 

We report average decode latency in milliseconds per generated token, end-to-end latency for a 128-token response, accepted-token throughput, downlink payload per generated token, draft-token acceptance rate, task-level generation quality, and privacy-exposure indicators. Throughput is computed from committed output tokens per second. Commu-nication volume includes encrypted tensor payloads, clipped logits, authentication tags, block metadata, and padding, but excludes fixed connection setup overhead. 

7.5 End-to-End Latency 

Table 3 reports the latency comparison. The proposed framework consistently outperforms cloud-only and naive split inference across all endpoint profiles. The GPU endpoint obtains the largest gain because local batching and endpoint-side draft verification reduce interaction rounds. The CPU endpoint also benefits from block-wise streaming, which overlaps downstream transfer with local decryption and partial projection. Table 3: End-to-end decode latency across endpoint profiles. Lower is better.                                               

> Method CPU endpoint ms/token GPU endpoint ms/token Edge endpoint ms/token Cloud-only 245 .3±5.8239 .1±5.1253 .2±6.4
> Cloud-only encrypted transport 257 .4±6.1249 .3±5.6265 .1±6.8
> Naive split inference 214 .5±4.9178 .2±4.4224 .0±5.7
> Endpoint-only lightweight –92 .1±3.0185 .3±5.2
> Proposed framework 151 .4±4.196 .0±2.8164 .0±4.6

For a 128-token response, the proposed framework achieves average end-to-end latencies of 19.4 s on the CPU endpoint, 12.3 s on the GPU endpoint, and 21.0 s on the edge endpoint. Relative to naive split inference, the reductions are 29.4%, 46.1%, and 26.8%, respectively. Although the endpoint-only lightweight model is faster on the GPU profile, it uses a smaller local model and therefore does not preserve the target cloud model as reliably as the verified collaborative workflow. 

7.6 Throughput and Bandwidth 

Table 4 reports throughput and downlink communication volume under different language modes. The communication volume is lowest in English-only mode because only 30% of vocabulary dimensions are retained. In mixed-language 9Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference mode, the full vocabulary is retained, so most of the logits-compression benefit disappears, but speculative decoding and split computation still improve latency. Table 4: Throughput and per-token downlink payload under different language modes.                                                           

> Endpoint Language mode Throughput tokens/s Downlink KB/token Compression vs. full logits CPU Chinese-only 6.6±0.264.2 56.2% CPU English-only 6.9±0.249.1 66.5% CPU Mixed 5.4±0.1154.0 0.0% GPU Chinese-only 10 .4±0.362.1 57.6% GPU English-only 11 .5±0.347.8 67.4% GPU Mixed 8.6±0.2151.3 0.0% Edge Chinese-only 6.1±0.263.8 56.5% Edge English-only 6.5±0.248.6 66.8% Edge Mixed 4.8±0.1153.1 0.0%

With 8-bit logits, a full 150,000-dimensional vector requires approximately 146.5 KB before metadata and authentication tags. The measured payload can be approximated as 

Payload ≈ |V ℓ| · b/ 8 + Btag + Bmeta + Bpad , (21) where Btag , Bmeta , and Bpad denote AES-GCM tags, block/session metadata, and padding. The measured values are therefore slightly larger than the theoretical clipped-logit sizes. 

7.7 Ablation Study 

Table 5 isolates the contribution of each component. Removing speculative decoding substantially increases latency because the cloud must perform more verified target-model decoding rounds. Removing language-adaptive compression mainly increases downlink payload. Removing split vocabulary projection increases both latency and payload because the endpoint must wait for larger cloud-side logits. Removing CPU block overlap hurts CPU latency, while removing endpoint KV-cache control has little latency impact but weakens the privacy-control objective. Table 5: Ablation results for major framework components. Lower latency and payload are better.                           

> Variant Profile Latency ms/token Throughput tokens/s Downlink KB/token Full proposed framework GPU 96 10.4 62.1 No speculative decoding GPU 126 7.9 62.1 No language-adaptive compression GPU 114 8.8 151.3 No split vocabulary projection GPU 137 7.3 151.3 No block/asynchronous overlap CPU 184 5.4 64.2 No endpoint KV-cache control GPU 97 10.3 62.1

7.8 Sensitivity to Split Dimension 

The endpoint-side split dimension Dend controls the trade-off between endpoint computation and cloud dependence. Table 6 varies Dend while keeping D = 4096 and using Chinese-only generation on the GPU endpoint. Very small split dimensions reduce endpoint computation but make the local projection less informative. Very large split dimensions increase endpoint workload and reduce the benefit of offloading. The default value Dend = 96 provides the best latency–throughput balance in our setting. 10 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference Table 6: Sensitivity analysis for endpoint-side projection dimension on the GPU endpoint. 

Dend Endpoint ratio Latency ms/token Throughput tokens/s Observation 48 1.17% 101 9.9 Lowest endpoint cost but weaker local contribution 96 2.34% 96 10.4 Best latency–throughput balance 128 3.12% 95 10.5 Slightly higher local cost with marginal gain 256 6.25% 98 10.2 Useful for stronger local privacy-sensitive projection 512 12.50% 109 9.2 Local projection dominates endpoint latency 

7.9 Sensitivity to Speculative Length 

Table 7 varies the draft length N on the GPU endpoint. Moderate draft lengths improve latency by reducing cloud interaction rounds. Overly long draft sequences lower the effective acceptance rate and increase verification overhead. The best trade-off appears at N = 5 .Table 7: Sensitivity analysis for speculative decoding length on the GPU endpoint. 

Draft length N Acceptance rate Latency ms/token Throughput tokens/s 1 96.5% 119 8.4 2 93.7% 107 9.3 4 88.1% 98 10.2 5 85.4% 96 10.4 6 81.2% 99 10.1 8 73.6% 110 9.1 

7.10 Generation-Quality Evaluation 

Because the cloud decoder remains the authoritative target model and draft tokens are verified before KV-cache update, the proposed method largely preserves the target model’s generation behavior. We evaluate next-token agreement on the 1,000-prompt workload, perplexity on the held-out prompt continuations, MMLU with a 5-shot prompt format, GSM8K with greedy chain-of-thought decoding, and HumanEval pass@1 with deterministic decoding. For task-level evaluation, all compared methods use the same prompt templates, decoding parameters, and evaluation scripts, so the reported differences reflect the collaborative inference mechanism rather than prompt or decoding changes. Table 8 shows that the proposed framework remains close to the full cloud model. The remaining degradation is mainly caused by 8-bit tensor quantization, language-adaptive masking, and endpoint-side approximation in the local projection. Table 8: Generation-quality comparison with the full cloud model. Higher is better except perplexity.                          

> Method Next-token agreement PPL MMLU GSM8K HumanEval pass@1 Full cloud model 100.0% 7.82 54.6 49.8 27.4 Proposed framework 98.6% 7.87 54.3 49.4 27.1 Proposed w/o language masking 98.8% 7.85 54.4 49.5 27.2 Endpoint-only lightweight 84.2% 10.94 46.1 37.8 18.6

7.11 Privacy-Exposure Accounting 

Privacy cannot be established by efficiency metrics alone. Table 9 accounts for the information visible to the cloud under different strategies. The proposed framework avoids sending raw prompts, plaintext history identifiers, endpoint-local module weights, and full logits. However, the cloud still observes decrypted feature tensors needed for authorized inference, cache-control metadata, and draft-token verification traces. Therefore, the framework reduces exposure under the stated honest-but-curious threat model rather than providing a formal privacy guarantee. 11 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference Table 9: Privacy-exposure accounting for different serving strategies.                                        

> Method Raw prompt Plain history ID Feature / hidden states Token trace Full logits Endpoint private module Formal guarantee Cloud-only Yes Yes No Yes No No No Cloud-only encrypted transport Yes Yes No Yes No No No Naive split inference No Often Yes Yes Often No No Endpoint-only lightweight No No No No No Yes Local Proposed framework No No Auth. tensors Draft / accepted No Yes No

# 8 Security Scope and Limitations 

The proposed framework is designed to reduce privacy exposure in practical edge–cloud deployment, but its security scope should be interpreted carefully. AES-GCM protects transmitted payloads against passive eavesdropping and tampering when keys and nonces are managed correctly, but the authorized cloud still observes decrypted tensors that are necessary for its part of inference. Endpoint-local LoRA modules and draft modules reduce the risk of hidden-state reconstruction by keeping important lightweight weights off the cloud. Endpoint-controlled KV-cache authorization reduces unnecessary historical-context exposure. However, the framework does not claim formal differential privacy. Hidden states can still carry information about the input, especially against strong adversaries with auxiliary knowledge or model access. Prior work on model inversion, inference attacks, and ML side channels motivates evaluating representation leakage rather than relying only on encrypted transport [ 49 , 50 , 51 ]. Deployment in high-risk environments should therefore combine this architecture with additional measures such as secure enclaves, strict access control, key rotation, audit logging, rate limiting, privacy evaluation against representation-inversion attacks, and stronger alternatives such as secure multi-party computation or differentially private forward passes when their overhead is acceptable [52, 53]. 

# 9 Discussion 

The design highlights a system-level trade-off between privacy, latency, bandwidth, and model quality. Increasing the endpoint-side dimension Dend can reduce dependence on cloud logits but increases endpoint computation. Increasing the speculative length N can reduce interaction rounds when acceptance is high, but may waste computation when draft quality is poor. Reducing LCache improves privacy control but can degrade contextual coherence. These trade-offs can be configured by endpoint type and application scenario. The empirical results show that the cache-authorized split-logits design improves latency and communication efficiency while keeping generation quality close to the full cloud model. The most important deployment trade-offs should be interpreted jointly rather than as isolated latency or privacy metrics, since a configuration that minimizes communication may still degrade generation quality or contextual coherence. 

# 10 Conclusion 

This paper presents an efficient and privacy-aware edge–cloud collaborative inference framework for LLMs. By combining endpoint-controlled KV-cache authorization, device-adaptive feature preparation, cloud-side decoder infer-ence, split vocabulary projection, language-adaptive logits compression, speculative decoding, AES-GCM encrypted transmission, and endpoint-local LoRA-adapted modules, the framework addresses the practical tension among latency, compute constraints, and privacy protection. The design supports heterogeneous endpoints ranging from pure CPU devices to GPU-equipped clients and ONNX-based edge devices, providing a foundation for deployable privacy-aware LLM inference systems. The evaluation further shows that the proposed framework improves latency and bandwidth efficiency across heterogeneous endpoint profiles while maintaining generation quality close to the full cloud model. 

# References 

[1] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2023. 12 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference [2] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [3] Tri Dao. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [4] Gyeong-In Yu, Jeongseok Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. ORCA: A distributed serving system for transformer-based generative models. In USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation , 2022. [5] Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Conglong Luo, Arash Elnawany, Shaden Smith, Minjia Zhang, Jeff Rasley, and Yuxiong He. DeepSpeed-Inference: Enabling efficient inference of transformer models at unprecedented scale. In International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2022. [6] Yiping Kang, Johann Hauswald, Cao Gao, Austin Rovinski, Trevor Mudge, Jason Mars, and Lingjia Tang. Neurosurgeon: Collaborative intelligence between the cloud and mobile edge. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems ,2017. [7] Yoshitaka Matsubara, Marco Levorato, and Francesco Restuccia. Split computing and early exiting for deep learning applications: Survey and research challenges. ACM Computing Surveys , 2022. [8] Hao Liang, Qiyang Sang, Chuan Hu, Dapeng Cheng, et al. DNN surgery: Accelerating DNN inference on the edge through layer partitioning. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 2023. [9] Yinan Hu, Connor Imes, Xiaoang Zhao, Suhas Kundu, et al. Pipeedge: Pipeline parallelism for large-scale model inference on heterogeneous edge devices. In Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design / Software Engineering and Advanced Applications , 2022. [10] Zeyu Hao, Hao Jiang, Shaoxiang Jiang, Jiajun Ren, and Ting Cao. Hybrid SLM and LLM for edge-cloud collaborative inference. In ACM MobiFoundation Workshop , 2024. [11] Sen Ye, Bin Ouyang, Laizhong Zeng, Tian Qian, Xiangjie Chu, et al. Jupiter: Fast and resource-efficient collaborative inference of generative LLMs on edge devices. In IEEE INFOCOM , 2025. [12] Jiayi Ning, Chenning Zheng, and Tong Yang. DSSD: Efficient edge-device LLM deployment and collaborative inference via distributed split speculative decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12000 , 2025. [13] Haojie Jin and Yufei Wu. CE-CoLLM: Efficient and adaptive large language models through cloud-edge collaboration. In IEEE International Conference on Web Services , 2025. [14] Mingyuan Zhang, Xiang Shen, Jiannong Cao, Zhenyu Cui, et al. Edgeshard: Efficient LLM inference via collaborative edge computing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2024. [15] Shuai Li, Hao Wang, Wenkang Xu, Rongxin Zhang, Song Guo, Jingdong Yuan, et al. Collaborative inference and learning between edge SLMs and cloud LLMs: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16731 , 2025. [16] Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2023. [17] Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling, 2023. [18] Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Rui Chen, and Zhihao Jia. Specinfer: Accelerating generative large language model serving with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In 

ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2024. [19] Zhenyu Chen, Avner May, Roman Svirschevski, Yuhsiang Huang, Max Ryabinin, Zhihao Jia, and Beidi Chen. Sequoia: Scalable, robust, and hardware-aware speculative decoding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [20] Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D. Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri Dao. Medusa: Simple LLM inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [21] Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. EAGLE-2: Faster inference of language models with dynamic draft trees. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2024. [22] Yichao Fu, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. Break the sequential dependency of LLM inference using lookahead decoding. arXiv preprint , 2024. 13 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference [23] Yingqian Zhou, Kaifeng Lyu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Sanjiv Kumar, Sashank J. Reddi, and Felix Yu. Distillspec: Improving speculative decoding via knowledge distillation. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [24] Mostafa Elhoushi, Akshat Shrivastava, Diana Liskovich, Basil Hosmer, Bram Wasti, Liangzhen Lai, Anas Mahmoud, Bilge Acun, Saurabh Agarwal, Ahmed Roman, et al. Layerskip: Enabling early exit inference and self-speculative decoding. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. [25] Jun Zhang, Jue Wang, Huan Li, Lidan Shou, Ke Chen, Gang Chen, and Sharad Mehrotra. Draft & verify: Lossless large language model acceleration via self-speculative decoding. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. [26] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2022. [27] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quantized LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [28] Zhiwei Lin, Xinyi Hu, Yifan Zhang, Zhenyu Chen, Zihao Fang, Xiang Chen, et al. Splitlora: A split parameter-efficient fine-tuning framework for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00952 , 2024. [29] Yansong Sun, Zhenyu Li, Yue Li, and Bolin Ding. Improving LoRA in privacy-preserving federated learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12313 , 2024. [30] Shima Malekmohammadi and Golnoosh Farnadi. On the implicit relation between low-rank adaptation and differential privacy. In NeurIPS Workshop on Privacy in Machine Learning , 2024. [31] Dongqi Yao and Bin Li. Is split learning privacy-preserving for fine-tuning large language models? IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 2024. [32] Yicheng Huang, Jianlong Yin, Zihao Tan, Qiang Wang, et al. SLDP-LoRA: A privacy-preserving split learning framework with low-rank adaptation. In IEEE International Conference on Network Security and Engineering ,2025. [33] Pinghui Mai, Rui Yan, Zeyu Huang, Yifei Yang, and Yanmin Pang. Split-and-denoise: Protect large language model inference with local differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09130 , 2023. [34] Muslum Ugurbil, Dimitris Mouris, Miguel B. Santos, et al. Fission: Distributed privacy-preserving large language model inference. In IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2025. [35] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. GPTQ: Accurate post-training quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [36] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Guanxiao Xiao, et al. AWQ: Activation-aware weight quantization for on-device LLM compression and acceleration. In Conference on Machine Learning and Systems ,2024. [37] Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickaël Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. Smoothquant: Accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2023. [38] Mingjie Sun, Zhiyuan Liu, Anna Bair, and Zico Kolter. A simple and effective pruning approach for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [39] Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. Minillm: Knowledge distillation of large language models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [40] Hao Shen, Hui Chang, Bo Dong, Yue Luo, and Hao Meng. Efficient LLM inference on CPUs. In Efficient Deep Learning: Methods, Systems, and Applications . Springer, 2025. [41] Zhenyu Zhang, Yao Sheng, Tianyi Jin, Chi Chen, Tianqi Liang, et al. H2O: Heavy-hitter oracle for accurate KV cache compression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [42] Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Streamingllm: Efficient streaming language models with attention sinks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [43] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Recommendation for block cipher modes of operation: Ga-lois/counter mode (gcm) and gmac. NIST Special Publication 800-38D, 2007. [44] Qipeng Pang, Jingyi Zhu, Hendrik Möllering, Wenqiang Zheng, et al. BOLT: Privacy-preserving, accurate and efficient inference for transformers. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2024. 14 Efficient and Privacy-Aware Edge–Cloud LLM Inference [45] Tianyu Chen, Hang Bao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Binxing Jiao, et al. THE-X: Privacy-preserving transformer inference with homomorphic encryption. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2022. [46] Dacheng Li, Rulin Shao, Hongyi Wang, Han Guo, Eric P. Xing, et al. MPCFormer: Fast, performant and private transformer inference with MPC. arXiv preprint , 2022. [47] Tashin Nayan, Zhenkai Zhang, and Ruizhe Sun. Secureinfer: Heterogeneous TEE-GPU architecture for privacy-critical LLM tensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19979 , 2025. [48] Microsoft. ONNX Runtime: Cross-platform, high performance machine learning inferencing and training accelerator. https://onnxruntime.ai/ . Accessed 2026. [49] Ruiyi Zhang, Shuichiro Hidano, and Farinaz Koushanfar. Text revealer: Private text reconstruction via model inversion attacks against transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10505 , 2022. [50] Yugeng Liu, Rui Wen, Xiang He, Ahmed Salem, Zhikun Zhang, et al. ML-Doctor: Holistic risk assessment of inference attacks against machine learning models. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2022. [51] Edoardo Debenedetti, Giorgio Severi, Nicholas Carlini, et al. Privacy side channels in machine learning systems. In USENIX Security Symposium , 2024. [52] Irene Zhou, Farbod Tofigh, Massimo Piccardi, Mehran Abolhasan, et al. Secure multi-party computation for machine learning: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 2024. [53] Min Du, Xiang Yue, Sherman S. M. Chow, Tianhao Wang, Chenguang Huang, et al. DP-Forward: Fine-tuning and inference on language models with differential privacy in forward pass. In ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2023. 15