Title: Chained Attacks on Drone-Based Federated Learning: From Network Disruption to Device Impersonation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.20280v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Jul 2026 01:05:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Chained Attacks on Drone-Based Federated Learning: From Network Disruption to Device Impersonation 

Suleiman Muhammad Sabo, Hamed Alkharsh, Peilin Li, Chuadhry Mujeeb Ahmed, Aydin Abadi, Shishir Nagaraja, Rajiv Ranjan 

School of Computing, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 

Abstract —Edge Intelligence (EI) has emerged as a transfor-mative model for mission-critical unmanned platforms, such as drone swarms, by enabling collaborative model training at the network periphery. However, the security of FL deploy-ments depends on both network availability and robust client authentication mechanisms. This paper investigates a chained attack against drone-based FL systems that combines network-layer denial-of-service with credential-based impersonation. We demonstrate that an adversary can: (1) force legitimate drones offline using 802.11 deauthentication attacks, and (2) subse-quently impersonate the disconnected drone using extracted credentials. Through a systematic literature review and empirical validation using the Flower framework on two distinct testbeds of Raspberry Pi and Jetsons, we quantify the impact of availability disruptions under Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) and Non-Independently and Identically Distributed (Non-IID) data distributions, and confirm that single-factor authentication permits post-disconnect impersonation. Our findings reveal that even short-term wireless interruptions cascade into substantial training instability, particularly under non-IID conditions, while the authentication gap enables adversaries to seamlessly replace disconnected nodes. We discuss the compounded implications for mission-critical drone deployments and outline directions for future defenses addressing both availability and authentication vulnerabilities. 

Index Terms —Federated Learning, UAV/Drone Swarms, Au-thentication, Deauthentication Attacks, Device Impersonation, Security 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Edge Intelligence (EI) and Federated Learning (FL) enable distributed devices to collaboratively train machine learning models without sharing sensitive raw data [1]–[3]. This decen-tralized paradigm is increasingly critical for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) swarms operating in mission-critical environ-ments, allowing for near-source data processing and real-time model adaptation [4]. However, the distributed architecture of FL introduces severe security challenges regarding network availability and client authentication. In wireless edge environments, nodes are susceptible to 802.11 deauthentication (DeAuth) attacks that exploit unen-crypted management frames to forcibly disconnect legitimate nodes [5]. Concurrently, the integrity of FL relies entirely on authorized client participation [6]; if an adversary successfully impersonates a trusted client, they can inject malicious updates or compromise the global model. This paper examines how availability disruption and identity spoofing can be combined into a practical chained attack against drone-based FL systems. We demonstrate that an adversary can execute a two-stage attack: first, forcing a legitimate drone offline via network-layer deauthentication to induce immediate training degradation; second, exploiting the resulting session vacancy to seamlessly impersonate the disconnected drone using extracted credentials. To empirically validate this threat, we move beyond soft-ware simulations and deploy a dual-platform physical testbed composed of Raspberry Pi and NVIDIA Jetson edge devices, utilizing the Flower framework [7]. Our key contributions are: 1) The design and implementa-tion of a compute-surrogate testbed to evaluate FL robustness under real-world network-layer deauthentication and imper-sonation attacks. 2) Empirical quantification of FL accuracy degradation under DeAuth attack intensities up to 80%, com-paring IID and non-IID data distributions. 3) Identification of a targeted “expert node” vulnerability under non-IID conditions, demonstrating that disconnecting data-concentrated clients causes disproportionate, class-specific model degradation. 4) 

Confirmation that standard single-factor node authentication permits undetected, post-disconnect impersonation. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Authentication Vulnerabilities in Drone-Based FL 

UAVs and drone swarms operate in dynamic environments, relying on lightweight authentication schemes such as HMAC, blockchain, or cryptographic key exchanges [8]–[13]. While specialized hardware [14] can increase assurance, it is rarely deployed in commercial swarms due to constraints on battery and computation [15]. Consequently, a critical vulnerability across both general UAV networks [16]–[18] and Edge-based Federated Learning (FL) [19]–[23] is the reliance on single-factor authentication. Most protocols treat the possession of valid credentials (e.g., cryptographic keys) as sufficient proof of identity [24], [25]. Because these frameworks lack Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA), they remain uniquely vulnerable to physical capture; an adversary can extract stored secrets from a downed drone and seamlessly impersonate it, bypassing network-layer protections entirely. 

B. Availability Attacks and the Research Gap 

While the FL literature extensively addresses benign “strag-glers” and proposes dynamic subnetwork assignments for arXiv:2607.20280v1 [cs.CR] 22 Jul 2026 TABLE I: Comparison of Related Work                                  

> Work Domain Physical Capture Availability Attack Auth Bypass Empirical
> Ouadah & Merazka [8] UAV No No No No Han et al. [13] Swarm Partial No No No Mahmood et al. [17] UAV/6G Yes No Discussed No Ji et al. [20] FL No No No Yes Wen et al. [27] FL No Straggler only No Yes
> This work Drone FL Yes Yes (DeAuth) Yes Yes

resource-constrained devices [26]–[29], there is limited em-pirical research on targeted availability shocks. Recent sur-veys [30]–[32] identify communication challenges but do not empirically quantify the connectivity-accuracy tradeoffs under adversarial conditions. Previous research largely treats network-level attacks and admission control in isolation. This work bridges that gap by demonstrating a chained attack that compounds 802.11 deauthentication with post-capture credential spoofing. While these individual primitives are established, our contribution lies in quantifying their combined impact on FL training dynamics—particularly the previously unexamined interaction with non-IID data heterogeneity. Table I positions our contri-bution relative to the state-of-the-art. III. T HREAT MODEL AND ATTACK CHAIN 

A. Adversary Capabilities 

In our model, the attacker does not possess prior knowledge of the network architecture but instead employs active and passive reconnaissance to map the swarm’s topology. This adversary model is characterized by two primary capabilities, which were validated on our testbed. 

Network Mapping and Role Identification. The adversary utilizes a wireless interface in monitor mode to identify the Service Set Identifier (SSID) and Basic Service Set Identifier (BSSID) of the swarm. As shown in Fig. 1, a targeted scan of the identified network reveals the MAC addresses of all active stations. 

Credential Acquisition. The adversary holds valid cryp-tographic credentials for at least one target node. We do not limit our threat model to a single acquisition method; instead, we recognize credential compromise as a realistic precondition that can occur through various means, including physical capture and forensic extraction from downed drones, supply chain infiltration, insider access, or insecure over-the-air provisioning. This assumption is consistent with recent analyses of unmanned edge intelligence, which identify cre-dential extraction from recovered platforms as a primary threat vector [18]. Critically, an adversary who acquires credentials through these means does not necessarily also possess a flight-capable replica of the physical airframe: keys recovered from a crash site, leaked through a supply chain, or obtained via an insider carry no accompanying aircraft. Fielding a physical decoy would require evading visual, radio-frequency, or radar-based fleet verification and risking detection during the mission itself. Replaying the credential over the wireless link, by contrast, requires only proximity to the network once the legitimate node has been forced offline. The attack chain is therefore the lower-cost, lower-risk path to persistent access for an adversary who holds a key but lacks a deployable aircraft distinct from, and requiring less capability than, physically substituting a rogue drone. 

B. Attack Chain 

The chained attack, illustrated in Fig. 2, proceeds in two stages. 

Stage 1—Targeted Network Disruption. Using the MAC addresses identified in Fig. 1, the adversary directs a burst of deauthentication frames at a specific drone. This action forces the drone into a persistent offline state, thereby preventing it from contributing local updates to the global model. Con-sequently, the aggregator does not receive the client’s local updates. 

Stage 2—Credential Impersonation. After obtaining cre-dentials from the attacked drone or anticipating the recovery of the disconnected drone, the adversary initiates an im-personating client using the cloned credentials. Because the legitimate client is offline due to Stage 1, the FL server accepts the impersonator as valid. This occurs because single-factor authentication cannot distinguish between the original hardware and an adversary presenting identical credentials. 

C. Attack Objectives 

The combined attack is designed to achieve several objectives:  

> •

Immediate degradation: Training instability through forced disconnections.  

> •

Persistent access: Gaining uninterrupted entry into fed-eration rounds through impersonation.  

> •

Stealth: Avoiding authentication failures in logs, causing the adversary to appear as a legitimate returning client. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

We validate the attack chain through two complementary experimental phases using Raspberry Pi and NVIDIA Jetson devices as drone surrogates. We adopt this compute-surrogate approach because the vulnerability under study resides in the 802.11 link layer and the FL client-authentication layer, neither of which depends on airframe dynamics, flight controller behaviour, or aerial radio propagation. Any platform running the same wireless stack and FL client software is subject to 

Fig. 1: Targeted reconnaissance of the swarm BSSID, mapping specific station MAC addresses. Fig. 2: Chained attack workflow: Stage 1 forces disconnection via 802.11 deauthentication; Stage 2 exploits the vacancy using extracted credentials. an identical attack surface at these two layers, regardless of whether it is airborne. This is consistent with prior benchmark-ing of edge-compute hardware for UAV payloads [1], [33]. Our approach establishes a causal link between physical-layer connectivity disruptions and the fundamental performance of EI in autonomous swarms. 

A. Experimental Testbeds and Hardware Configuration 

We deployed two standalone physical clusters, shown in Fig. 3, connected via an isolated 802.11 wireless network:  

> •

General-Purpose Edge Cluster: A 10-node homoge-neous cluster of Raspberry Pi 4B units (Broadcom BCM2711, 4 GB RAM), one PC workstation acting as the FL server, running the Flower framework to coordinate model broadcast and aggregation.  

> •

GPU-Accelerated Cluster: An 8-node NVIDIA Jetson cluster. In this setup, 7 Jetson modules function as the clients, while the 8th module acts as a localized Super-Link (server) aggregator. An additional Raspberry Pi equipped with a REALTEK monitor-mode adapter (RTL8812AU) served as the adversarial node. This node performed the reconnaissance scans visualized in Fig. 1 and executed the synchronized deauthentication injections. The isolated wireless network used in our experiments operated without 802.11w Management Frame Protection (PMF) enabled, which is why unauthenticated deauthentication frames were effective in Stage 1. We acknowledge this as a boundary condition of our threat model rather than an inci-dental configuration choice: PMF support remains inconsis-tent among several representative IoT development platforms, some of which lack full out-of-the-box support even when the underlying hardware is technically capable [34]. 

B. FL System Configuration 

We implemented synchronous Federated Averaging (Fe-dAvg) [2] using the Flower framework [7]. The server was configured to tolerate partial participation, enabling rounds to proceed despite significant dropouts. The CIFAR-10 dataset was used with a standard CNN architecture. The number of global rounds was set to 10 because extending training 

Fig. 3: Experimental testbed: 8-node Jetson cluster with ded-icated attacker node for deauthentication injection. beyond 10 rounds resulted in only marginal performance improvements, while increasing runtime and adding little ana-lytical value to the comparison. This stopping choice isolates the attack-induced convergence disruption without extending runtime. 

1) Data distributions  

> •

IID: Training data shuffled and randomly partitioned equally across clients.  

> •

Non-IID: We generated label-skewed client partitions using the Flower DirichletPartitioner over the CIFAR-10 training set, partitioning by label with concentration parameter α = 0 .3 and seed 42 . Dirichlet partitioning induces both class imbalance and unequal per-client dataset sizes; in our 10-client setup, client sizes ranged from approximately 1.1k to 9.7k samples while remaining disjoint and summing to the CIFAR-10 training set size (50,000). 

2) Model Weight Verification via Network Traffic Analysis 

Model parameter transmission during federated learning was verified using a multi-stage framework that integrated packet capture, Protobuf decoding, and cross-layer log align-ment. During the initial stages of our testbed deployment, all client-server communications were conducted without TLS encryption to enable direct packet inspection and validation of the FL protocol implementation. This approach enabled us to inspect the contents of network packets and verify that the Flower framework was transmitting model parameters rather than metadata, logs, or other auxiliary information. Network traffic was captured using Wireshark, through which 

PushObjectRequest messages generated by the Flower client were identified. Each of these messages contained a 746-byte object_content field encoded with Google Fig. 4: Wireshark capture of the Flower 

PushObjectRequest packet. Protocol Buffers. A custom Python decoder was implemented to interpret the payload. The decoding process identified a fully connected layer with shape (10 , 84) . An excerpt of the recovered weight matrix is presented below:                  

> Preview of weights: [[ 1.83726791e-02 -2.09797233e-01 4.93503697e-02 -2.98543628e-02 8.38919808e-02 6.39304482e-02 -5.98880658e-01 1.36638818e-02 -2.08551668e-02 -3.18821784e-02 -3.88097906e-02 -1.10503078e-01 6.86666186e-02 1.21692688e-02 0.09434399e-01 -4.29202149e-01 ... [-5.10263558e-02 7.62932122e-02 1.36620075e-02 4.37011030e-02 -6.22387230e-02 2.78727490e-02 6.46504440e-02 4.90706244e-02 -2.68124342e-01 -5.11277068e-02 -1.31564449e-02 1.77118689e-02]]

As shown in Fig. 4, the Wireshark capture demonstrates the structure of the PushObjectRequest packet, with the highlighted object_content field clearly visible. This plaintext inspection phase served as a critical baseline for understanding legitimate FL communication patterns, essential context for our subsequent analysis of malicious model up-dates. After TLS was enabled for all subsequent experiments, on-wire inspection of model parameters was no longer feasible without access to session keys. 

3) Attack Injection 

Targeted deauthentication attacks were executed by the ad-versary using aireplay-ng with the following parameters: 

Intensity (I): Percentage of clients targeted per round: I ∈{20% , 40% , 60% , 80% }, corresponding to 2, 4, 6, and 8 clients respectively. 

Timing: Attacks synchronized to FL workflow phases pre-round (blocking model download) and mid-round (disrupting training/upload). 

4) Metrics  

> •

Accuracy Degradation (∆A): ∆A = Abaseline − Aattack  

> •

Convergence Instability (σL): Standard deviation of training loss over the attack-affected rounds  

> •

Connectivity Cost (CC ): Per-round latency penalty from reconnection 

C. Stage 2: Credential Impersonation 

After demonstrating that deauthentication attacks can reliably disconnect legitimate clients in Stage 1, the next step is to evaluate whether an adversary can exploit this disruption window to impersonate the disconnected drone. This eval-uation corresponds to the second phase of the attack chain illustrated in Fig. 2. It is assumed that the adversary has obtained valid client credentials through any available means, including physical capture, insider access, credential leakage, or supply chain compromise. The focus is on assessing the system’s resilience to impersonation, rather than the method of credential acquisition. 

1) Extended Configuration 

Building on the Stage 1 infrastructure, we extended our testbed to evaluate credential-based impersonation. The FL server was configured with the following features:  

> •

TLS encryption for all communications  

> •

CSV-based node authentication using EC key pairs for timestamp signing 

2) Attack Scenarios 

We evaluated two impersonation scenarios to reflect differ-ent stages of adversarial progression. 

Scenario 1 (Concurrent): The attacker attempts to con-nect while the legitimate client remains active, using cloned credentials. This baseline scenario tests whether the system detects duplicate identities. 

Scenario 2 (Post-Disruption): After a successful Stage 1 deauthentication attack, the legitimate client is disconnected. The attacker subsequently connects using the victim’s cre-dentials, thereby completing the full attack chain depicted in Fig. 2. V. R ESULTS 

A. Stage 1: Impact of Network Disruption 1) IID Data Distribution (Raspberry Pi vs. Jetson) 

Under IID conditions, both hardware platforms demon-strated resilience to availability attacks, though with distinct absolute accuracy levels and degradation patterns. The Rasp-berry Pi testbed achieved a baseline accuracy of 57.00% after 10 training rounds, which declined to 49.80% under sustained attack (rounds 5 to 8 at escalating intensity), representing a 7.20% reduction in final accuracy. In comparison, the Jetson testbed achieved a higher baseline accuracy of 73.40% after 10 rounds, with the attack condition converging to 71.10% accuracy, resulting in a 2.30% loss. The smaller final accuracy gap observed on the Jetson platform indicates that increased computational capability and faster local convergence can partially offset the long-term effects of client unavailability, although transient degradation remains evident during the active attack period. 

2) Non-IID Data Distribution (Raspberry Pi vs. Jetson) 

Under Non-IID conditions, characterized by class imbalance across clients, both platforms exhibited reduced robustness rel-ative to IID scenarios, with the Raspberry Pi testbed displaying greater vulnerability overall. On the Raspberry Pi, the baseline achieved 55.38% accuracy after 10 rounds, while the attacked system converged to 39.63%, resulting in a 15.75% loss, which is more than double the degradation observed under IID conditions. For Jetson, the baseline Non-IID accuracy reached 76.27% after 10 rounds, whereas the attacked configuration attained 68.41%, resulting in a 7.86% decrease. Although this relative loss is smaller than that observed on Raspberry Pi, Jetson Non-IID runs still exhibited a pronounced degradation plateau during the attack phase. These results underscore that statistical heterogeneity remains a primary factor in vulnera-bility to availability attacks, even on more capable hardware. Attack intensity analysis, as shown in Table II, was conducted on both platforms; intensities up to 80% are reported for the Raspberry Pi to characterise worst-case sensitivity under resource-constrained conditions. Jetson experiments evaluated attack intensities up to 60% (rounds 5–7), as higher intensities yielded only marginal additional degradation due to faster local convergence. The effects of the attack persisted throughout the active disruption period on both platforms. On Raspberry Pi, at the peak attack intensity of 80% (round 8), the instantaneous accuracy gap between baseline and attacked Non-IID runs reached 18.07% and did not fully recover by round 10. Jetson runs exhibited a comparable pattern during the attack window (rounds 5 to 7), with reduced accuracy under Non-IID attack relative to the Non-IID baseline, though the long-term gap was smaller by the end of training. These findings indicate that the breaking point under Non-IID conditions occurred at lower effective attack intensities than under IID on both testbeds, confirming that data distribution skew increases vulnerability to availability attacks. 

3) Targeted Expert Node Removal (Raspberry Pi) 

To assess the strategic implications of targeted client se-lection under Non-IID conditions, an additional experiment was conducted on the Raspberry Pi testbed by removing the two clients with the highest concentrations of specific classes. The Non-IID data distribution exhibited pronounced label skew: Client 8 (partition 8) contained 2,811 Class 1 samples, accounting for 29% of its 9,671 total samples and serving as the primary source of Class 1 knowledge. Client 2 (partition 2) held 3,409 Class 6 samples (59% of its 5,807), making it the dominant expert for Class 6. Together, these two clients represented approximately 31% of the total training data. Removal of these two expert nodes resulted in both a decrease in overall accuracy and impaired convergence. The baseline system with all 10 clients achieved 56.09% accuracy after 10 rounds, whereas the expert-depleted system showed a 3.61% reduction in final accuracy. Additionally, convergence speed declined: the baseline reached 50% accuracy by round 4, while the system without experts required 7 rounds to achieve similar performance (49.08%), representing a 3-round delay and a 75% increase in time-to-competency. These find-ings indicate that targeted removal of expert nodes is more detrimental than random dropout at equivalent data volumes. This effect is intrinsic to federated learning rather than to the underlying wireless attack: the disproportionate impact arises because the adversary’s disconnection choice interacts with the TABLE II: Accuracy Degradation Under IID and Non-IID Distributions (Raspberry Pi).                  

> Round Attack Intensity (%) ∆AIID (%) ∆ANon-IID (%)
> 520 4.80 9.18 640 6.50 10.04 760 7.20 16.32 880 6.40 18.07

non-IID structure of the FL data partition. A generic wireless DoS attack against any 802.11 client cannot produce this class-specific degradation, since it has no analogue of “expert” data concentration to exploit. 

4) Convergence Instability ( σL)

Convergence instability, denoted as σL, was measured as the standard deviation of training loss during the attack-affected rounds on the Raspberry Pi testbed (rounds 5 to 8). For the baseline condition, the mean loss over these rounds was 1.3114 with σL = 0.0168 , indicating stable convergence. Under the deauthentication attack, in which clients were forcibly disconnected and did not rejoin, σL increased to 0.5393, reflecting substantially more volatile loss trajectories and disrupted optimization dynamics. These results indicate that availability attacks not only reduce final accuracy but also increase training process variability, complicating convergence guarantees in heterogeneous federated learning systems. 

5) Connectivity Cost ( CC )

Connectivity cost, CC , was calculated as the difference in mean accuracy between the baseline and attack conditions during the attack window (rounds 5–8) on the Raspberry Pi testbed. For the baseline, the mean accuracy over these rounds was 0.5249, while the mean accuracy under attack was 0.4361, resulting in CC = 0 .0888 . This metric quantifies the operational performance penalty associated with client loss during network disruption. In the Jetson experiments, a similar pattern emerged: although absolute accuracies were higher, the attack rounds still exhibited a notable CC , demonstrating that increased computational capacity does not fully eliminate the performance cost driven by connectivity loss. Table II summarises the degradation in accuracy observed on the Raspberry Pi testbed under increasing availability attack intensity for both IID and Non-IID distributions, while Table III provides a cross-platform comparison of final-round accuracy and degradation for Raspberry Pi and Jetson systems. These results are further illustrated in Fig. 5 (specifically Fig. 5a for the Raspberry Pi testbed and Fig. 5b for the Jetson cluster), which shows the accuracy trajectories across all training rounds under both IID and Non-IID attack conditions. 

B. Stage 2: Impersonation Results 

Impersonation experiments utilized a controlled five-client federation with TLS mutual authentication and Flower node authentication enabled. Five Raspberry Pi 4 devices served as legitimate clients, and a sixth device operated as the impersonator, pre-configured with credentials extracted from Client 2 during Stage 1. The evaluation included two sce-narios: concurrent impersonation while the legitimate client 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10   

> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> Round
> Accuracy
> Pi Baseline (Non-IID) Pi under Attack (Non-IID)
> Pi Baseline (IID) Pi under Attack (IID)

(a) Raspberry Pi cluster accuracy.            

> 12345678910
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> Round
> Accuracy
> Jetson under Attack (IID) Jetson under Attack (Non-IID)
> Jetson Baseline (IID) Jetson Baseline (Non-IID)

(b) Jetson cluster accuracy. 

Fig. 5: Accuracy trajectories across training rounds under IID and Non-IID conditions for both testbeds. The red shaded regions denote active attack windows. TABLE III: Cross-Platform Accuracy and Degradation (Round 10). 

Platform Dist. Baseline (%) Attack (%) ∆A (%) 

Raspberry Pi IID 57.00 49.80 7.20 Raspberry Pi Non-IID 55.38 39.63 15.75 Jetson IID 73.40 71.10 2.30 Jetson Non-IID 76.27 68.41 7.86 

remained connected, and post-disconnect impersonation fol-lowing forced disconnection. 

1) Attack Timeline 

The five-round training run completed in 292.04 seconds. Four distinct phases were identified from the server-side logs, with key excerpts presented below. 

a) Phase 1: Normal operation (Round 1). 

All five legitimate clients were sampled, completed training, and returned results without error:                     

> [ROUND 1] configure_fit: strategy sampled 5clients (out of 5) aggregate_fit: received 5results and 0failures aggregate_evaluate: received 5results and 0failures

b) Phase 2: Forced disconnection (Round 2). 

The deauthentication attack began at the start of Round 2. The server initially sampled all five clients; however, midway through the round, Client 2’s session was terminated, as indicated by the DeleteNode entry. The evaluation phase confirmed the dropout:                       

> [ROUND 2] configure_fit: strategy sampled 5clients (out of 5) [Fleet.DeleteNode] Delete node_id=14308369969468497996 aggregate_fit: received 5results and 0failures aggregate_evaluate: received 4results and 1failures

It is notable that the server did not log any security alert; the failure was treated as a routine client dropout. 

c) Phase 3: Impersonator infiltration (Round 3). 

With Client 2 offline, the server sampled only four clients for training. During this round, the impersonator connected using Client 2’s extracted private key. The server accepted the new node, assigned an identifier, and served the global model:                              

> [ROUND 3] configure_fit: strategy sampled 4clients (out of 4) [Fleet.CreateNode] Created node_id=2923142953798957254 aggregate_fit: received 4results and 0failures [Fleet.GetRun] Requesting ’Run’ for run_id =4087803549789865333 [Fleet.GetFab] Requesting FAB for fab_hash= c65d375febbb6c398ec99... aggregate_evaluate: received 5results and 0failures

The impersonator participated in evaluation, restoring the client count to five. No authentication failure was logged during this process. 

d) Phase 4: Full integration (Rounds 4–5). 

From Round 4 onward, the impersonator was indistinguish-able from legitimate participants, contributing model updates during both training and evaluation:                                       

> [ROUND 4] configure_fit: strategy sampled 5clients (out of 5) aggregate_fit: received 5results and 0failures aggregate_evaluate: received 5results and 0failures [ROUND 5] configure_fit: strategy sampled 5clients (out of 5) aggregate_fit: received 5results and 0failures aggregate_evaluate: received 5results and 0failures

Overall, the impersonator participated in two full rounds and contributed two model updates to the global model. Training loss converged consistently throughout (Round 1: 2.30, Round 5: 1.70), confirming that the server incorporated the imperson-ator’s updates without detecting any anomaly. 

2) Concurrent Impersonation (Scenario 1) 

When the impersonating client attempted to connect while Client 2’s session remained active, the SuperLink server rejected the connection. Flower enforces a single active ses-sion per public key, preventing duplicate participation within a training round. Although this mechanism provides basic protection against credential cloning during active sessions, it does not prevent impersonation following disconnection events, whether caused by network failure, client crash, or adversarial action, as demonstrated above. 

3) Post-Disconnect Impersonation (Scenario 2) 

The interval between disconnection and successful imper-sonation spanned approximately one training round (approxi-mately 58 seconds), demonstrating that adversaries possess a practical exploitation window. From the server’s perspective, the impersonator was indistinguishable from the legitimate client throughout. These results confirm that Flower’s authen-tication model operates on a possession-based assumption: valid credentials imply legitimate identity. This approach is fundamentally flawed when credentials can be compromised through physical capture or extraction. 

4) Security Implications 

The experimental results reveal a significant gap between authentication and authorisation in federated learning frame-works. TLS mutual authentication verifies that a connecting client possesses valid credentials, but it cannot determine whether the credential holder is the originally provisioned device, whether the connection follows a legitimate or ad-versarial disconnection, or whether the device’s integrity has been compromised. Single-session enforcement protects only against concurrent credential reuse, leaving a persistent vulner-ability window after any disconnection event. In adversarial environments where physical capture is feasible, such as autonomous drone deployments, this window can be reliably created and exploited. VI. E THICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

All experiments were conducted on isolated, researcher-controlled Raspberry Pi and Jetson testbeds and a dedicated wireless network; no third-party systems or operational drone platforms were targeted. The study did not involve human subjects, interviews, or human-derived sensitive data. Network traces and device identifiers used during experimentation were limited to experiment-owned devices and sanitized where appropriate in the paper. In accordance with responsible disclo-sure best practices, the identified authentication vulnerability was reported to the affected framework’s development team prior to submission. VII. D ISCUSSION 

This study investigated a chained attack targeting drone-based FL systems, which combines network-layer denial-of-service with credential-based impersonation. The empirical results indicate that: (1) deauthentication attacks substantially degrade training performance, especially under non-IID data conditions where the loss of an “expert” client results in irreversible accuracy reductions; and (2) single-factor, credential-based authentication in the Flower framework allows post-disconnect impersonation to occur without detection. The attack chain, consisting of forced disconnection followed by impersonation, presents a practical threat to FL deployments in environments with physical accessibility. 

A. The Chained Attack Surface 

The chained attack creates a compounded threat profile that exceeds the individual impact of each component. By com-bining availability disruption with authentication bypass, an adversary can escalate a temporary denial-of-service into a persistent integrity breach. 

1) Forensic Invisibility 

A principal finding is the forensic indistinguishability of the attack. From the server’s perspective, the victim node appears to disconnect due to routine instability, such as battery depletion or signal loss, and subsequently reconnects. Since the FL aggregator is stateless, it accepts the returning client without identifying the session gap as suspicious. This stealth characteristic ensures the attack leaves no application-layer logs, requiring correlation of physical-layer Wi-Fi data with application-layer training logs for effective anomaly detection. 

2) Targeted Model Blindness (Non-IID Condition) 

Under non-IID conditions, the availability attack becomes highly targeted. Experimental results show that disconnecting nodes leads to a disproportionate reduction in model accuracy. An adversary with knowledge of the data distribution can strategically disconnect expert nodes to achieve two objec-tives: (1) induce targeted class-specific failures while main-taining superficially acceptable overall accuracy metrics, and (2) significantly delay model convergence, thereby degrading operational readiness. In drone surveillance scenarios where rapid threat detection is critical, removing expert nodes for specific vehicle types or threat classes enables selective blind-ness attacks that evade aggregate accuracy monitoring while severely impairing performance on strategic targets. 

B. Generalizability and Implications 

Although empirical validation was performed using the Flower framework, the identified vulnerability constitutes a con-ceptual flaw in the standard FL protocol rather than an implementation-specific defect. Most FL aggregation strate-gies, such as FedAvg, are designed to be stateless and resilient to high client churn, implicitly assuming that valid credentials ensure valid identity regardless of session continuity. The consequences for autonomous drone swarms are sub-stantial. In military or search-and-rescue scenarios, the attack chain enables an adversary to degrade swarm performance and assume control of a node’s identity.  

> •

Persistence: If credentials are static and reused across missions, a single successful key extraction allows in-definite impersonation, even after the physical device is recovered or destroyed.  

> •

Strategic Manipulation: An adversary could suppress recognition of hostile assets by targeting and replacing drones responsible for training on those assets. Existing defenses addressing either availability or authen-tication in isolation are insufficient. Comprehensive pro-tection likely requires integrating network, authentication, and aggregation-layer defenses. Promising directions include hardware-local attestation for client-side verification, crypto-graphic freshness proofs for hardware continuity, and differ-ential privacy hardening; we leave the design and evaluation of these mechanisms to future work. VIII. C ONCLUSIONS 

This study has demonstrated a practical chained attack against drone-based federated learning systems that combines network-layer denial-of-service with credential-based imper-sonation. The empirical validation on Raspberry Pi and Jetson testbeds confirms that deauthentication attacks substantially degrade training performance, particularly under non-IID data distributions, while single-factor authentication in the Flower framework permits post-disconnect impersonation without de-tection. Future work should pursue: (1) multi-trial statistical valida-tion with larger swarms (50 to 100 clients) to quantify variance in attack effectiveness and scaling effects; (2) development and prototyping of multi-factor authentication methods suitable for resource-constrained drones; and (3) evaluation of the attack chain across a broader range of FL frameworks and drone hardware platforms. REFERENCES [1] S. Liu, N. Shan, X. Bao, and X. Xu, “Distributed collaborative data processing framework for unmanned platforms based on federated edge intelligence,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 15, p. 4752, 2025. [2] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. Ag¨ uera y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from de-centralized data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 54. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [3] A. Abadi, B. Aldali, B. Vincent, E. A. J. Hurley, H. Aljazaeri, J. Hedley-Cook, J.-L. Bell, L. Uwuigbusun, M. Ahmed, R. Umar, S. Nagaraja, S. Sabo, and W. Alrbeiqi, “Decentralized weather forecasting via dis-tributed machine learning and blockchain-based model validation,” in 

2025 3rd International Conference on Federated Learning Technologies and Applications (FLTA) , 2025, pp. 150–157. [4] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning for internet of things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1622–1658, 2021. [5] C. Hamroun, A. Fladenmuller, M. Pariente, and G. Pujolle, “Intrusion detection in 5G and Wi-Fi networks: A survey of current methods, challenges, and perspectives,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 1–34, 2025, early Access. [6] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 115, pp. 619–640, 2021. [7] D. J. Beutel, T. Topal, A. Mathur, X. Qiu, J. Fernandez-Marques, Y. Gao, L. Sani, H. K. Li, T. Parcollet, P. P. B. de Gusm˜ ao, and N. D. Lane, “Flower: A friendly federated learning research framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14390 , 2020. [8] M. Ouadah and F. Merazka, “Securing UAV communication: Authenti-cation and integrity,” in 2024 11th International Conference on Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications (WINCOM) . IEEE, 2024. [9] W. Salam, S. K.-u.-R. Raazi, and N. H. Ansari, “SELTHA: Secure, efficient and lightweight authentication mechanism for unmanned aerial vehicle network,” in 2023 7th International Multi-Topic ICT Conference (IMTIC) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–7. [10] A. K. Mishra, M. Wazid, D. P. Singh, A. K. Das, J. Singh, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Secure blockchain-enabled authentication key management framework with big data analytics for drones in networks beyond 5G applications,” Drones , vol. 7, no. 8, p. 508, 2023. [11] J. Akram, A. Akram, R. H. Jhaveri, M. Alazab, and H. Chi, “BC-IoDT: Blockchain-based framework for authentication in internet of drone things,” in Proceedings of the 5th International ACM Mobicom Workshop on Drone Assisted Wireless Communications for 5G and Beyond . ACM, 2022, pp. 115–120. [12] Y. Aydin, G. Karabulut-Kurt, E. Ozdemir, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Au-thentication and handover challenges and methods for drone swarms,” 

CoRR , vol. abs/2201.05657, 2022. [13] K. Han, E. Al Nuaimi, S. Al Blooshi, R. Psiakis, and C. Y. Yeun, “Scalable authenticated communication in drone swarm environment,” 

Journal of Internet Technology , 2024. [14] K. S. Roy, M. Sujith, B. Bhanu, Preethi, and R. A. Hazarika, “FPGA-based dual-layer authentication scheme utilizing AES and ECC for un-manned aerial vehicles,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking , vol. 2024, no. 1, p. 91, 2024. [15] N. Kammoun, A. B. C. Douss, and R. Abassi, “A novel lightweight authentication mechanism for uavs based on sddn architecture,” in 

2024 20th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6. [16] K.-M. Seo, J. Kim, S. Lee, J.-W. Kwon, and S.-H. Seo, “Efficient remote identification for drone swarms,” Computers, Materials and Continua ,2023. [17] K. Mahmood, S. Shamshad, M. H. Anisi, A. Brighente, M. A. Saleem, and A. K. Das, “A privacy-preserving access control protocol for 6G supported intelligent UAV networks,” Vehicular Communications ,vol. 54, p. 100937, 2025. [18] X. Wang, Z. Zhao, L. Yi, Z. Ning, L. Guo, F. R. Yu, and S. Guo, “A sur-vey on security of UAV swarm networks: Attacks and countermeasures,” 

ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 74:1–74:37, 2024. [19] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan et al. , “Advances and open problems in federated learning,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning ,vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021. [20] S. Ji, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Han, and C. Ma, “LAFED: A lightweight authentication mechanism for blockchain-enabled federated learning system,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 145, pp. 56–67, 2023. [21] Y. Huang, G. Xu, Q. Wang, X. Song, and X. Wang, “Efficient and privacy-preserving authentication for federated learning in industrial internet of things data sharing application,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 11 652–11 663, 2024. [22] X. Li, Y. Li, H. Wan, and C. Wang, “Enhancing Byzantine robustness of federated learning via tripartite adaptive authentication,” Journal of Big Data , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 121, 2025. [23] A. Badhib, S. Alshehri, and A. Cherif, “IoT authentication in federated learning: Methods, challenges, and future directions,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 24, p. 7619, 2025. [24] A. Kumar, A. S. Yadav, S. S. Gill, H. Pervaiz, Q. Ni, and R. Buyya, “A secure drone-to-drone communication and software defined drone network-enabled traffic monitoring system,” Simulation Modelling Prac-tice and Theory , 2022. [25] S. Ju, H. Park, S. Son, H. Kim, Y. Park, and Y. Park, “Blockchain-assisted secure and lightweight authentication scheme for multi-server internet of drones environments,” Mathematics , vol. 12, no. 24, p. 3965, 2024. [26] C. Feng, N. Huber, A. Huertas Celdran, G. Bovet, and B. Stiller, “Demo: A practical testbed for decentralized federated learning on physical edge devices,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08033 [27] D. Wen, K.-J. Jeon, and K. Huang, “Federated dropout—a simple ap-proach for enabling federated learning on resource-constrained devices,” 

IEEE Wireless Communications Letters , vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 923–927, 2022. [28] B. Li, H.-a. Su, L. Li, J. Geng, X. Qin, Y. Hou, X. Fu, and M. Pan, “Stars-fl: Accelerating federated learning over heterogeneous mobile devices via spatial-temporal aware reconfigured subnetworks.” [29] F. Malandrino and C. F. Chiasserini, “Federated learning at the network edge: When not all nodes are created equal,” IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 80–85, 2021. [30] L. Cooray, J. Sendanayake, P. Vithanaarachchi, and Y. H. P. P. Priyadar-shana, “Deep federated learning: A systematic review of methods, applications, and challenges,” Frontiers in Computer Science , vol. 7, 2025. [31] H. Janardhanan, “Federated learning in edge computing: Advancements, security challenges, and optimization strategies,” in IEEE International Conference on Circuits, Power and Computing Technologies (ICCPCT) ,2025. [32] L. Almeida, R. Teixeira, G. Baldoni, M. Antunes, and R. L. Aguiar, “Federated learning for a dynamic edge: A modular and resilient approach,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 12, p. 3812, 2025. [33] D. Minott, S. Siddiqui, and R. J. Haddad, “Benchmarking edge AI platforms: Performance analysis of NVIDIA jetson and raspberry pi 5 with coral TPU,” in Proc. IEEE SoutheastCon , 2025, pp. 1384–1389. [34] G. A. Alghisi and F. Gringoli, “An experimental analysis of the WPA3 protocol in IoT devices,” in 2024 22nd Mediterranean Communication and Computer Networking Conference (MedComNet) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–4.