Title: Ground-Side Mission Plan Compilation with Policy-as-Code Guardrails for Cloud-Native Satellite Platforms

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14798v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 01:28:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Ground-Side Mission Plan Compilation with Policy-as-Code Guardrails for Cloud-Native Satellite Platforms 

Hsiu-Chi Tsai 

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan thc1006@ieee.org 

Chia-Tung Chung 

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan jun.514114.ee10@nycu.edu.tw 

Abstract —Onboard cloud-native runtimes for satellites are emerging on multiple tracks (ORCHIDE’s K3s and Argo Work-flows stack, Axiom Space’s AxDCU-1 with Red Hat MicroShift, and Kepler Communications’ NVIDIA Jetson Orin edge nodes), but each assumes that the workflow artifacts it executes arrive from the ground. ORCHIDE’s architecture document D3.1 states explicitly that “only the Deferred Phase is part of the ORCHIDE scope,” and no open-source ground-side toolchain has been released by the consortium. We present S ATELLITE MISSION 

COMPILER , a four-stage pipeline that addresses this gap: it takes a human-authored mission plan, checks it against machine-checkable structural and policy rules, and compiles it into the container-workflow artifacts that cloud-native satellite runtimes consume. Concretely, the pipeline parses the plan against a Pydantic schema derived from public ORCHIDE materials, evaluates it against an OPA/Rego policy package of ten deny rules with explicit ORCHIDE-inherited versus author-imposed provenance, compiles it into a typed WorkflowIntent intermediate representation (IR), and renders it as Argo Workflow directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and Kueue Job manifests with Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) support. We classify pre-uplink loss events into four severity tiers tied to specific schema and policy checks, and anchor the layered-validation design in the safety reading of defense-in-depth (NASA-STD-8739.8B), distinguished from the security reading of NIST SP 800-53. The implementation is validated by golden translation evaluations, argo lint , an in-process baseline that reproduces OPA’s decisions, and live single-node cluster submission—including a DRA-backed GPU admission cascade on Kueue v0.17.3 (re-validated on v0.18.3) and, on v0.18.3, a unified GPU+CPU device-class quota with a scheduler-level accelerator fallback. Six Model Context Protocol (MCP) tools expose the pipeline to AI agents through a path-traversal-protected interface (CWE-22). The compiler is released under EUPL-1.2 (DOI 10.5281/zenodo.21228150). 

Index Terms —satellite mission planning, cloud-native, Argo Workflows, OPA/Rego, Kueue, policy-as-code, ORCHIDE 

© 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. Accepted for publication in the IEEE Space Mission Challenges for Information Technology / Space Computing Conference (SMC-IT/SCC), 2026. This arXiv version is an extended version of that paper, adding a unified GPU+CPU DRA quota and a scheduler-level accelerator fallback re-validated on Kueue v0.18.3 (Section V-F). 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Onboard cloud-native runtimes for satellites have moved from concept to deployment along several parallel tracks. The ORCHIDE EU project (Horizon grant #101135595) has publicly specified an onboard stack of K3s , Argo Workflows, 

containerd , urunc [18]-hosted unikernels, EOS storage, and 

vAccel -mediated accelerators running on heterogeneous on-board hardware (NVIDIA Jetson Orin GPUs, Xilinx Versal FPGAs, NXP LX2160 ARM64 CPUs, and Kalray MPPA accelerators), presented at KubeCon EU 2026 [1], [2], [4]. Red Hat and Axiom Space’s AxDCU-1, an orbital data-center prototype powered by Red Hat Device Edge (which includes the MicroShift lightweight Kubernetes distribution) was announced in March 2025 [31] and delivered to the International Space Station aboard SpaceX CRS-33 in August 2025 for an on-orbit data-processing demonstration. Kepler Communications reported in March 2026 the commissioning of distributed on-orbit compute across its ten Tranche 1 satellites, using forty NVIDIA Jetson Orin modules as edge-compute nodes interconnected by optical inter-satellite links to support AI and accelerated workloads [32]. The technology stacks differ in im-portant ways, and KubeSpace [15] has argued that the standard Kubernetes control plane is ill-suited to low-Earth-orbit (LEO) satellite networks characterized by geographic dispersion and frequent handovers. What the deployed tracks share, however, is the assumption that the workflow artifacts they execute— directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), container manifests, resource claims—arrive from the ground. The artifacts arrive, but the ground-side tooling that should produce them is uneven. ORCHIDE’s architecture document D3.1 states explicitly that “only the Deferred Phase is part of the ORCHIDE scope” (Section II-A ): the onboard Orchestrator executes mission plans but does not itself generate, validate, or compile them. The consortium’s ground segment does include a Software Development Kit (SDK), a Simulation Framework, and a Management Framework, but none of those tools, nor any mission-plan schema or policy-enforcement layer, has been released as open source (Section II-A ). The other onboard tracks similarly assume but do not provide a way to take arXiv:2607.14798v1 [cs.DC] 16 Jul 2026 a structured mission plan, prove it is well-formed under a published schema, and emit the Argo artifacts the onboard runtime executes together with the Kueue artifacts that gate ground-side admission. The consequence of operating without that layer is concrete rather than hypothetical: a plan whose acquisition step has no fallback resource class declared can reach the satellite and stall the Deferred Phase when the requested accelerator is unavailable; a download event missing a ground-visibility window can be admitted and then never executed, queuing the next plan behind it; a structural error in the YAML payload can require a corrective uplink that consumes the next contact window. Section III-H classifies these consequences by severity tier. Validation of mission plans against configurable rules is not a new problem. Commercial mission-planning systems such as GMV FlexPlan [33] have for decades supported reusable con-straint and rule definitions, and command-sequence checking against flight rules is a mature practice at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), exemplified by the RP-check architecture used in Mars-rover operations [34]. Open-source frameworks exist on the ground-control side (OpenC3 COSMOS [35] runs on Kubernetes via Helm, scaling to constellation-sized fleets) and the EOEPCA platform [27] already compiles Common Workflow Language specifications for Earth-observation data-processing applications into Argo workflows. Each of these systems addresses part of the problem the ORCHIDE-class onboard runtimes raise; none of them, however, provides as an open-source toolchain the specific combination of (i) policy-as-code over (ii) satellite mission plans , distinct from generic command sequences or data-processing apps, (iii) compiled into Argo Workflow and Kueue Job artifacts that (iv) target the artifact formats consumed by onboard cloud-native runtimes such as ORCHIDE. This paper contributes that synthesis. We present S ATELLITE 

MISSION COMPILER , an open-source four-stage pipeline that takes a structured mission plan and produces validated Argo and Kueue artifacts. Concretely:  

> •

A Pydantic [19] schema derived from the public OR-CHIDE materials enumerated in Section II-A , with parse-time enforcement of timezone-aware timestamps, instrument presence for acquisition events, and structural integrity of AI services and steps.  

> •

An OPA (Open Policy Agent)/Rego policy package of ten deny rules, separated explicitly into rules derived from ORCHIDE materials and rules imposed by the authors as safety practice, with provenance indicated in Table II.  

> •

Argo Workflow and Kueue Job renderers supporting sequential and parallel execution modes, soft-preference GPU affinity, and Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) for accelerators. DRA-backed GPU admission with single-device quota was demonstrated against Kueue v0.17.3 on a kubeadm cluster (Section V-E ), and extended on Kueue v0.18.3 to a unified GPU+CPU device-class quota and an opt-in scheduler-level firstAvailable accelerator fallback, with the empirical boundary that Kueue quota-counts only exactly device requests (Section V-F).  

> •

Six Model Context Protocol (MCP) [20] tools that expose the pipeline to AI agents through a path-traversal-protected interface (Common Weakness Enumeration CWE-22). The implementation is validated by golden translation evaluations, static Argo linting against argo v4.0.1, an in-process baseline that reproduces the OPA policy decisions, and live-cluster submission on host kubeadm Kubernetes clusters (v1.35–v1.36 across experiments) running Argo, Kueue, and the NVIDIA DRA driver. Source code is released under the European Union Public Licence v1.2 (EUPL-1.2) at https://github.com/thc1006/satellite- mission- compiler (DOI 10.5281/zenodo.21228150). II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Background: The ORCHIDE Onboard Cloud-Native Plat-form 

ORCHIDE (Orchestration of Reliable Computing on Het-erogeneous Infrastructures Deployed at the Edge) is an EU Horizon Europe project running from December 2023 to May 2026, led by Thales Alenia Space with Tarides, KP Labs, Thales Romania, and POLITEHNICA Bucharest as partners [2]. Its objective is an onboard Edge Platform-as-a-Service for Earth-observation satellites: a runtime stack that lets operators deploy, update, and revise containerized AI workflows while the spacecraft is in orbit. The publicly described ORCHIDE solution consists of three components targeted at the ground segment—a Software Development Kit, a Simulation Frame-work, and a Management Framework—together with the onboard runtime they target, the Orchestrator [2], [3]. The compiler presented in this paper provides three functions absent from the published ORCHIDE artifacts: schema validation, policy-as-code enforcement, and compilation into the artifacts the Orchestrator consumes. 

Onboard technology stack.: ORCHIDE’s onboard Orches-trator runs K3s [23] as its lightweight Kubernetes distribution and Argo Workflows [22] as the directed-acyclic-graph execu-tion engine, with containerd and the urunc [18] OCI (Open Container Initiative) runtime hosting Unikraft and MirageOS 

unikernels under hypervisor isolation. The platform uses EOS, the distributed-storage system originally developed at CERN, as its data backbone; Zot as the OCI registry; and vAccel as a hardware-agnostic abstraction over graphics-processing-unit (GPU) and field-programmable-gate-array (FPGA) accelera-tors [4], [40]. The choice is constrained by the size, weight, and power (SWaP) envelope typical of an Earth-observation payload; the use of Argo Workflows specifically allows a mission plan to be represented as a graph of containerized steps with explicit data and resource dependencies. 

Structure of an ORCHIDE mission plan.: A mission plan is a time-ordered sequence of events distributed over one or more orbits. Each event has a type, either an acquisition ,which is bound to an instrument identifier (e.g., optical and hyperspectral cameras, radars, or multi-detector arrays) and a region descriptor distinguishing ocean (O) from land (L) [1], [4], or a download , characterized by a ground-visibility window and a transmission duration. Acquisition events carry one or more 

AI services ; each service is annotated with a priority on the 1–4 scale used by the onboard scheduler [1] and is decomposed into an ordered sequence of steps . Steps declare a phase (preprocessing , AI inference , or postprocessing ) and a resource class (CPU, GPU, or FPGA) [1]. Plans may also declare an optional fallback resource class per step. The public ORCHIDE materials note this field but do not specify how an Orchestrator ought to act on it; this paper treats fallback declaration as a recommended safety practice and enforces it through a policy rule for any accelerator-requesting step (Section III-D ,Rule 4)—an author-imposed rule, not an ORCHIDE-inherited requirement. 

The Deferred Phase scope and the ground-side gap.: D3.1 states explicitly that “only the Deferred Phase is part of the ORCHIDE scope” and that the Acquisition and Transmission phases are outside that scope [2, §2.2]. The mission plan itself reaches the Orchestrator through D3.1’s mission-plan deployment interface, identified as IF_SO_MIS_DP in the project’s interface catalogue [2, §3.3.1, Table], and is consumed by the onboard Mission Manager and dispatched to its Workflow Manager subcomponent for execution [2, §3.2.1.1]. The Orches-trator does not generate, validate, or compile that plan; although the consortium has demonstrated graphical SDK tools on its YouTube channel [43], no open-source ground-side toolchain, mission-plan schema, or policy-enforcement layer has been released as of June 2026. A malformed plan that bypasses ground-side checks consumes scarce in-orbit compute and downlink budget before the next plan can be uploaded, with consequences ranging from missed observation windows to Deferred-Phase stalls. Section III-H returns to this consequence model. Section III-A presents the compiler that addresses this gap. 

What public materials cover and what they do not.: Our schema and compilation pipeline are derived from the union of publicly available ORCHIDE artifacts to date: deliverables D2.2 (state-of-the-art review of edge orchestration and unikernel technologies), D3.1 (overall solution architecture and design), and the dissemination deliverables D6.1 and D6.2 [2], [3], [38], [39]; Karam Hankache’s EDHPC 2025 talk on the onboard data-processing orchestrator [4]; the KubeCon EU 2026 talk by Karam Hankache and Weisz [1]; the CERN-hosted workshop presentation by Weisz on ORCHIDE’s use of EOS for space edge computing [40]; and the consortium’s June 2026 archival paper [41], published after our initial submission, which docu-ments the onboard architecture but does not release a ground-side schema or policy package. The technical deliverables D3.2, D4, D5, and D7 remain confidential at the time of writing. The Pydantic schema we present in Section III-C is designed as a pluggable boundary: when an authoritative ORCHIDE specification or an open-source schema is released, replacement is intended to be mechanical because the schema does not propagate into the policy package or into the renderers. Section VI returns to this point. 

B. Policy-as-Code, Safety, and the Security–Safety Distinction 

OPA [5] is a general-purpose policy engine that evaluates rules written in the Rego declarative language. OPA is a Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) Graduated project and is widely deployed as a Kubernetes admission controller through Gatekeeper [24]. We use OPA because the policy is a separate artifact that a reviewer can execute and audit standalone: an external auditor can run opa eval against arbitrary inputs without invoking the compiler. Version control and independent review OPA shares with any in-repo validator; what OPA adds over a hand-written Python validator is compiler-independent executable evaluation delivered by a standard, off-the-shelf external tool. 

Layered defensive validation.: The compiler enforces four independent checks on every mission plan before any artifact is admitted to a cluster: (i) structural validation against a 

Pydantic v2 schema, (ii) semantic policy evaluation against ten Rego deny rules, (iii) static lint of the rendered Argo Workflow YAML via argo lint , and (iv) runtime admission by the Kubernetes API server, optionally fronted by Kueue. We call this, by analogy with NASA-STD-8739.8B’s layered Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V), layered defensive validation by partially redundant checkers : each stage has a distinct primary failure mode—the schema catches type, cardinality, and required-field errors at parse time; the policy catches cross-field semantic errors that span multiple fields; the static lint catches manifest-level errors introduced by the renderer; and admission catches violations of the target cluster’s own constraints—and the stages overlap by design so that a defect in an overlapping check does not silently propagate. The schema and policy layers overlap on five of the ten rules (1, 2, 7, 8, and 9), documented in Section III-D ;the resulting pre-uplink loss-event classification is given in Section III-H. 

Security defense-in-depth versus safety defense-in-depth.: 

The term defense-in-depth is used in two distinct technical communities and carries different operational interpretations in each. In the security community, defense-in-depth refers to overlapping controls (network, host, application, and data) that together mitigate adversarial threats to confidentiality, integrity, and availability, as catalogued in NIST SP 800-53 [25]. In the safety community, defense-in-depth refers to layered, mutually redundant verification of safety-relevant artifacts so that no single analytical or implementation error can propagate undetected to the operational system. The safety reading is articulated by NASA’s Software Assurance and Software Safety Standard [36] and is consistent with the constraint-enforcement perspective of Leveson’s Systems-Theoretic Accident Model and Processes (STAMP) [37], whose associated hazard-analysis technique is Systems-Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA). The two readings are complementary but not interchangeable, and the layered validation pipeline of this paper instantiates the safety reading through partially redundant layers. The ORCHIDE consortium’s own archival paper [41] describes its onboard Security Manager as offering a “layered defense-in-depth posture” against an “adversarial satellite environment”—verbatim the security reading—which the ground-side validation pipeline of this paper does not duplicate. The compiler does not implement the security reading—it does not authenticate uplink operators, encrypt transmitted artifacts, or defend the cluster against an adversarial mission-plan author—and that scope boundary is recorded in Section VI. 

Scope disclaimer.: NASA-STD-8739.8B [36] prescribes a full software-assurance program including hazard analysis, assurance records, and IV&V by an organization independent of the developer; this paper does not produce those deliverables. STPA-style hazard analysis would be the natural successor to the consequence-tier classification we adopt in Section III-H but is outside the scope of a ground-side compiler. We invoke both standards as the source of the safety-defense-in-depth practice that motivates the layered design, not as compliance claims. 

On novelty.: OPA satisfies the version-control, decoupling, and external-audit requirements that motivate our choice of policy engine. The contribution of this paper is the synthesis of OPA-style policy-as-code with a typed mission-plan schema and an Argo/Kueue renderer targeting the artifact formats of an onboard cloud-native runtime; the precise scope of that synthesis claim, and the adjacent systems it does and does not overlap with, are deferred to Section II-D. 

C. Kubernetes Batch Admission 

Kueue [6] is a Kubernetes-native job queuing system provid-ing fair-share scheduling, resource quotas, and preemption for batch workloads. Baseline DRA integration (the ResourceClaim Template path with deviceClassMappings ) shipped as alpha in Kueue v0.14.0 (September 2025); v0.17.0 (March 2026) added an alpha extended-resources path enabled by the DRAExtended Resources feature gate. The v0.17.3 release [7] (May 2026) that we exercise in Section V-E retains the same gate [11]. Vol-cano [13] provides a richer abstraction (scheduler, PodGroup, queue), but its API surface exceeds the requirements of single-Job-per-service workloads. We treat Kueue as the admission target because its ClusterQueue + LocalQueue abstraction maps cleanly to the per-mission quota model the renderer needs; the application to satellite workload scheduling is the contribution Section II-D positions among adjacent ground-side toolchains. 

D. Related Work Onboard cloud-native runtimes for satellites.: Several tracks are converging on container-based orchestration in orbit, each naming a specific Kubernetes-derived or Kubernetes-adjacent runtime rather than vanilla Kubernetes. The ORCHIDE consortium specifies an onboard K3s +Argo stack (detailed in Section II-A ) with a project-end demonstration that was targeted for May 2026 [1], [2], [4]. Red Hat and Axiom Space’s AxDCU-1, an orbital data-center prototype running Red Hat Device Edge (which includes the MicroShift lightweight Kubernetes distri-bution) was announced in March 2025 [31] and delivered to the International Space Station aboard SpaceX CRS-33 in August 2025 for on-orbit data-processing experiments. Kepler Communications reported in March 2026 the deployment of forty NVIDIA Jetson Orin modules across its ten Tranche 1 satellites; as of that announcement the orchestration layer above the Jetson modules is not publicly specified [32]. KubeSpace’s orbit-aware critique [15] targets onboard control-plane stability and is orthogonal to the ground-side compilation layer the present work occupies. 

Commercial mission planning and command-sequence validation.: Validation of mission plans against configurable rules is a mature practice. GMV’s FlexPlan is a commercial mission-planning product that has supported reusable constraint and rule definitions for ground-segment scheduling across multiple operators [33]. On the spaceflight-operations side, JPL’s RP-check is an architecture for command-sequence validation against flight rules, developed and deployed in Mars-rover surface operations [34]. Both reflect the practitioner expectation that automated rule checking is essential before commands or plans leave the ground. 

Ground-control and EO data-processing frameworks.: 

On the open-source side, OpenC3 COSMOS is an open-source mission-operations framework, with a separate commercial Enterprise edition that adds Kubernetes/Helm deployment for constellation-scale fleets; its focus across both tiers is telemetry, command, and the operator-facing console rather than mission-plan compilation [35]. The European Space Agency (ESA) EOEPCA platform compiles Common Workflow Language (CWL) specifications for Earth-observation data-processing applications into Argo workflows via Calrissian [27], but the inputs are processing-application descriptors, not satellite mission plans, and policy enforcement is not part of the compilation contract. Adjacent systems address different layers: Krios [16] and Komet [17] contribute LEO scheduling and serverless abstractions, KubeEdge [14] provides edge orchestra-tion with reported satellite deployments, Kratos OpenSpace [28] deploys Rancher Kubernetes Engine 2 (RKE2)/ K3s for ground-station signal processing, and the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems’ mission-planning standard (CCSDS-MPS) [29] together with operator systems such as the Ger-man Aerospace Center (DLR) EnMAP Mission Planning System [30] formalise constraint-based mission planning at a layer above the workflow runtime. 

Recent developments (2026).: The literature published while this system matured advances the layers around the compiler without closing the ground-side gap. On the space cloud-native side, YUHENG-OS proposes a cloud-native oper-ating system for distributed satellite clusters and benchmarks it against vanilla Kubernetes [44], while Equinox turns onboard battery, thermal, and queue state into a marginal cost of execution for decentralized scheduling on Earth-observation constellations [45]; both sit at the onboard-runtime and scheduling layer that consumes workflow artifacts rather than the ground-side layer that produces and validates them. A position paper on the edge-cloud-space continuum enumerates the assumptions that break when serverless and orchestration models move to low-Earth orbit and names constraint-aware placement of workflow graphs as an open problem [46]— the placement our compiler front-loads with schema and policy checks. On the heterogeneous-scheduling side, an independent Kubernetes+Argo+Kueue framework for hybrid quantum-classical pipelines corroborates the toolchain we chose for accelerator admission [47], ClusterLess demon-strates deadline-aware serverless workflow orchestration across federated edge clusters [48], and BIDENT maps neural-network operators across heterogeneous CPU/GPU/NPU units on edge hardware [49]—an operator-level analogue of the GPU →CPU device fallback of Section V-F . On the workload side, edge intelligence for satellite Earth observation schedules image acquisition and on-board-versus-ground processing under energy constraints [50], the acquisition-and-download task model our mission plans encode. Finally, an empirical study of policy-as-code adoption across open-source projects frames OPA/Rego governance as an established engineering practice rather than an ad hoc choice [51]; space-specific policy-as-code nonetheless remains scarce, a gap this paper’s policy package addresses. These systems collectively cover the onboard-runtime, edge-orchestration, heterogeneous-scheduling, and policy-as-code layers that surround the compiler, yet none takes a satellite mission plan through schema and policy validation into onboard-runtime artifacts. 

The ground-side compilation gap.: None of the four threads above offers a typed, policy-checked compilation path from a satellite mission plan to onboard-runtime workflow artifacts. The onboard-runtime thread stops at the runtime itself; the commercial-planning and command-sequence threads define rules but not container-workflow output; the ground-control and EO threads either focus on telemetry-and-command (COSMOS) or compile from processing-application descriptors rather than mission plans (EOEPCA); and the adjacent constraint-based planning systems (KubeSpace/Krios/Komet/CCSDS-MPS/EnMAP) operate at a layer above the workflow run-time without emitting validated Argo or Kueue artifacts. Section III-A presents the compiler that addresses this gap; Table I quantifies the gap across the dimensions of mission-plan input, policy-as-code, and Kubernetes-artifact output. III. S YSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

A. Pipeline Overview 

The compiler implements a four-stage pipeline (Fig. 1): Stage 1 validates the mission plan schema using Pydantic ,Stage 2 evaluates OPA/Rego policy rules, Stage 3 compiles validated plans into a typed WorkflowIntent intermediate representation (IR), and Stage 4 renders the IR into Argo Workflow and Kueue Job artifacts. 

B. Mission Plan Input Format 

Listing 1 shows an excerpt from a maritime surveillance mission plan. The plan declares two events on one orbit: an acquisition event at 10:30 running a three-step ship detection pipeline (preprocess, detect-ships, postprocess), and a down-load event at 10:42 transmitting results during a 268-second   

> Mission Plan YAML
> Stage 1: Schema Validation (Pydantic v2)
> Stage 2: Policy Evaluation (OPA/Rego)
> Stage 3: WorkflowIntent IR
> Argo Workflow YAML
> Kueue Job YAML
> Fig. 1. Four-Stage Compilation Pipeline
> mission_id: mission-alpha events: - timestamp: "2026-04-15T10:30:00Z" event_type: acquisition instrument: optical-camera services: - service_id: maritime-surveillance priority: 90 steps: - name: preprocess image: ghcr.io/example/preprocess:0.1.0 resource_class: cpu - name: detect-ships image: ghcr.io/example/ship-detector:0.1.0 resource_class: gpu fallback_resource_class: cpu - name: postprocess resource_class: cpu - timestamp: "2026-04-15T10:42:00Z" event_type: download duration_seconds: 268 ground_visibility: true
> Listing 1. Mission plan input (abbreviated)

ground-visibility window. The detect-ships step requests GPU acceleration with CPU fallback. 

C. Schema Validation (Stage 1) 

The mission plan schema is implemented as Pydantic v2 [19] 

BaseModel classes derived from publicly available ORCHIDE materials, with the structural elements summarized inline in Section II-A. Key constraints enforced at parse time:  

> •

Acquisition events must specify an instrument.  

> •

Download events must specify duration, must not declare AI services, and must require ground visibility.  

> •

mission_id must not be empty; events must contain at least one entry; each service must have at least one step. Error messages include source references back to the ORCHIDE materials enumerated in Section II-A , enabling downstream auditing of rule provenance. Service priority uses a 0–100 scale internally (0 is a misconfiguration, since ORCHIDE’s target scale starts at 1, and is rejected by policy Rule 5); ORCHIDE’s onboard scheduler uses 1–4 (Section II-A ). We preserve priority intent as-is in the domain model; translation to ORCHIDE’s scale belongs in the rendering layer, which is a deployment-specific concern. TABLE I COMPARISON WITH ADJACENT SYSTEMS 

System Mission plan input Policy-as-code (PaC) K8s artifact output Domain 

This work ✓ ✓(OPA/Rego) ✓(Argo + Kueue) Satellite ground-side ORCHIDE [1] Receives plan – Argo (embedded) Satellite onboard AxDCU-1 / MicroShift [31] – – – Orbital data-center prototype Kepler / Jetson [32] – – – On-orbit Jetson edge compute KubeSpace [15] – – – LEO control plane Krios [16] – – – LEO scheduling Komet [17] – – FaaS (custom) LEO serverless GMV FlexPlan [33] ✓(commercial) proprietary rules – Ground-segment planning JPL RP-check [34] ✓(cmd. seq.) flight rules (non-PaC) – Command-sequence validation OpenC3 COSMOS [35] – – K8s/Helm (Enterprise) Ground-control ops EOEPCA+ [27] – – CWL → Argo (Calrissian) EO data pipelines Kratos OpenSpace [28] – – RKE2/K3s (ops) Ground station infra OPA Gatekeeper [24] – ✓(OPA/Rego) – K8s admission (general) 

D. Policy Evaluation (Stage 2) 

Ten OPA/Rego deny rules enforce semantic constraints, several requiring cross-field reasoning, as summarized in Table II. 

TABLE II OPA/R EGO POLICY RULES 

# Constraint Origin Prov. 1 mission_id not empty Integrity A2 At least one event Integrity A3 ACQ must declare services ORCHIDE doc D4 GPU/FPGA must have fallback Safety A5 Priority must not be zero Range A6 CPU must not claim accel. Logic A7 DL must not carry services ORCHIDE doc D8 DL requires visibility ORCHIDE doc D9 Services must have ≥1 step Validity A10 Landscape type recognized ORCHIDE doc D

> D = directly traceable to ORCHIDE docs; A = author-imposed safety policy

Schema validation and policy evaluation intentionally overlap on Rules 1, 2, 7, 8, and 9 in the safety defense-in-depth sense of Section II-B : schema catches structural errors at parse time, while policy catches data bypassing schema validation (e.g., raw JSON submitted directly to OPA). Listing 2 shows two representative Rego rules. Rule 4 requires any GPU or FPGA step (independent of the optional 

needs_acceleration flag) to declare a fallback resource class. Rule 6 flags the contradictory combination of CPU resource class with needs_acceleration .OPA is invoked as a subprocess with a 30-second timeout (CWE-400 mitigation). Standard output and standard error are captured separately to prevent error message leakage into policy results. 

E. Compilation to IR (Stage 3) 

The compiler filters acquisition events and generates a Work-flowIntent for each AI service. The IR carries ten resource hints including event timestamp, ground visibility, region type, orbit, duration, landscape type, execution mode, and three Boolean flags for GPU/FPGA requirements and fallback. 

> accel_bound(s) if s.resource_class == "gpu" accel_bound(s) if s.resource_class == "fpga" missing_fallback(s) if not s.fallback_resource_class missing_fallback(s) if s.fallback_resource_class == null deny contains msg if { some i, j, k step := input.events[i].services[j].steps[k] accel_bound(step) missing_fallback(step) msg := sprintf("accelerator step %q " "(resource_class %q) must declare " "fallback_resource_class", [step.name, step.resource_class]) }deny contains msg if { some i, j, k step := input.events[i].services[j].steps[k] step.resource_class == "cpu" step.needs_acceleration == true msg := sprintf("step %q claims needs_acceleration" " but uses cpu resource class", [step.name]) }

Listing 2. OPA/Rego policy rules (abbreviated) 

Workflow names are normalized to RFC 1123 [26] DNS labels at IR creation time to ensure consistent resource identification across heterogeneous renderers. 

F. Argo Workflow Rendering (Stage 4a) 

The renderer produces Argo v1alpha1 Workflow manifests with DAG-based execution. Sequential mode builds a linear dependency chain; parallel mode omits dependencies. Unknown execution modes default to sequential to prevent accidental parallelism. Each step template includes phase annotations (preprocessing, AI inference, postprocessing) as defined in Section II-A , and GPU steps use soft-preference node affinity with fallback via an environment variable. Both the raw 0–100 priority and its deterministic translation to ORCHIDE’s 1–4 scale are emitted as workflow annotations ( orbital/priority and 

orbital/orchide-priority ). The translation buckets 0–100 onto 1–4 (76–100 →1 through 1–25 →4; priority 0 is rejected by Rule 5), taking 1 as the highest priority—the common schedul-ing convention, since ORCHIDE’s public materials document apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1 kind: Workflow metadata: name: mission-alpha-maritime-...-00z annotations: orbital/priority: '90 '   

> orbital/orchide-priority: '1'
> orbital/execution-mode: sequential orbital/requires-gpu: 'true '
> spec: entrypoint: main templates: - name: main dag: tasks: - name: preprocess template: step-0-preprocess - name: detect-ships template: step-1-detect-ships depends: preprocess - name: postprocess template: step-2-postprocess depends: detect-ships
> Listing 3. Rendered Argo Workflow DAG (abbreviated)

the 1–4 scale but not its direction, so this too is an assumption pending interface disclosure. The orbital/orchide-priority 

key, and the assumption that an ORCHIDE Workflow Manager consumes it, are this paper’s proposal pending disclosure of the deployment interface (Section II-A ); interoperation with the unreleased onboard scheduler is not verified here. Listing 3 shows a rendered DAG. 

G. Kueue Job Rendering (Stage 4b) 

The renderer produces batch/v1 Job manifests with Kueue [6] admission labels. Unlike the Argo renderer, which preserves the full multi-step DAG, the Kueue renderer generates an admission-oriented Job for the primary compute step (GPU step if present, else first step); full pipeline execution is delegated to the Argo path. Listing 4 shows a rendered Job. We chose Kueue over Volcano [13] for admission control. Kueue’s ClusterQueue + LocalQueue abstraction handles fair queuing and GPU quotas without an additional scheduler. Kueue v0.17.0 introduced alpha-level DRA support for ex-tended resources. Our renderer generates DRA ResourceClaims for GPU workloads and standard resource requests for CPU-only workloads. 

H. Loss Events and Severity Tiers 

A ground-side admission-gate compiler is only useful insofar as the checks it enforces correspond to real in-orbit consequences. We therefore classify the loss events that a malformed or under-constrained mission plan can produce into four severity tiers, each tied to the schema or policy check that catches it. The classification is consequence-oriented, in the spirit of hazard-tier practice in software-safety engineering— the severity classification of NASA-STD-8739.8B [36] and the constraint-enforcement perspective of STAMP [37], whose associated hazard-analysis technique is STPA—but the tiers below are an operational classification for the compiler’s admission gate, not a flight safety case. Provenance tags in Table III reproduce the convention of Table II: D denotes a check derived from ORCHIDE’s published Deferred-Phase   

> apiVersion: batch/v1 kind: Job metadata: generateName: mission-alpha-maritime-...-labels: kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: orbital-demo-local mission-id: mission-alpha spec: template: spec: containers: - name: detect-ships resources: requests: cpu: '1'
> memory: 256Mi claims: - name: gpu resourceClaims: - name: gpu resourceClaimTemplateName: ...-gpu-claim
> Listing 4. Rendered Kueue Job with DRA (abbreviated)

scope, and A denotes a check that the authors impose as safety practice. 

Tier interpretation and provenance.: T1 captures structural violations: missing required fields, malformed timestamps, or type errors caught by the Pydantic schema, plus the OPA backstops for an empty mission_id (Rule 1) and a plan with no events (Rule 2). Such plans are rejected on the ground before any uplink is attempted; the in-orbit consequence is therefore null. T1 is author-imposed ( A); Rules 1–2 narrow the residual risk on a schema-bypass path, but if both Pydantic and the policy package are bypassed entirely no pre-uplink guarantee applies. T2 covers semantic violations that would not crash the onboard Orchestrator but could cause the Deferred Phase to stall: a GPU step with no fallback_resource_class 

(Rule 4) cannot be rescheduled if the accelerator is unavailable, and a CPU step asserting needs_acceleration (Rule 6) is inter-nally contradictory. Both are author-imposed ( A); ORCHIDE documents the field but does not prescribe how the Orchestrator should act on it (Section II-A ). “Deferred-Phase stall” is one plausible behavior under that unspecified policy; the rule prevents the ambiguous configuration from reaching orbit regardless of the Orchestrator’s eventual behavior. T3 covers checks tied to the download-event contract that ORCHIDE’s published materials specify directly ( D): a download event carrying AI services (Rule 7) violates the published ORCHIDE invariant that DOWNLOAD events carry no WORKFLOW field (Section II-A ), and a download event with missing or false 

ground_visibility (Rule 8) cannot transmit during its sched-uled window. T4 captures checks whose violation can drop AI processing of a primary observation. Rule 3 is per-event: an 

acquisition event with no services attached ( D) is still acquired at the sensor but produces no processed output. Rules 5, 9, and 10 are per-service (Rego some i, j): priority zero on the compiler’s 0–100 scale, a range check informed by ORCHIDE’s documented 1–4 scale (Rule 5, A), a service with no executable steps (Rule 9, A), or a service with an unrecognized landscape_type preventing model selection (Rule 10, D; the field is optional, so the rule flags a present TABLE III PRE -U PLINK LOSS -E VENT SEVERITY TIERS AND THEIR SCHEMA /OPA C HECKS 

Tier Loss event Detected by Rules In-orbit consequence T1 Plan malformed Pydantic + OPA 1, 2 none (ground reject) T2 Accelerator stall, deferrable OPA 4, 6 Deferred-Phase stall T3 Contact-window loss Pydantic + OPA 7, 8 missed/malformed downlink T4 Mission-objective loss OPA 3, 5, 9, 10 AI service drop                         

> Provenance per row: T1 A(Rules 1 A, 2 A); T2 A(Rules 4 A, 6 A); T3 D(Rules 7 D, 8 D); T4 mixed (Rule 3 D, Rule 5 A, Rule 9 A, Rule 10 D). Rule 5’s Atag reflects that its priority ̸=0 check operates on the compiler’s 0–100 scale rather than ORCHIDE’s documented 1–4 scale; its Tier T4 placement is interpretive. The Detected by column lists the layer(s) that catch every rule in the tier; in T4, Rule 9 is also schema-enforced (the Section II-B overlap set), but Rules 3, 5, and 10 are policy-only, so the tier as a whole is caught only by OPA.

unrecognized value but permits a null or omitted one) each drop the affected service. None of these consequence modes involves spacecraft hardware damage—the failure modes are scheduling stalls, missed contact windows, or null AI-service execution. These in-orbit consequences are derived from ORCHIDE’s published Deferred-Phase semantics rather than measured on the onboard runtime, which is not publicly available; the tiers are a mechanistically grounded pre-uplink risk model that motivates the admission gate, not empirically measured outcomes. IV. MCP A GENT INTERFACE 

Six Model Context Protocol [20] tools expose the pipeline to AI agents via FastMCP [21]: validate_plan (schema check), compile_plan (IR generation), render_argo (work-flow rendering), explain_policy (OPA evaluation), diff_plans 

(structural comparison), and check_timeline_conflicts . The last tool detects interval overlaps using max( astart , b start ) <

min( aend , b end ). A scripted client exercises the tools end-to-end through the real MCP server in scripts/mcp_agent_demo.py :it validates a plan, surfaces a missing-fallback violation via 

explain_policy (Rule 4), then re-checks a corrected plan and compiles and renders it. The fix is applied from a pre-authored corrected plan rather than synthesized by an LLM; the demonstration shows the tool surface is composable and agent-consumable, and closing the diagnose–repair–verify loop with an autonomous agent is future work. File path validation uses Path.relative_to() containment checks rather than prefix matching to prevent path traversal (CWE-22). Plan files accept only bare filenames within a whitelisted directory. V. E VALUATION 

A. Case Study: Error Detection 

We evaluated the compiler on three categories of mission plans. Table IV summarizes the results. 

Valid plans: The ORCHIDE-format sample plan (3 events, 3 AI services across 2 orbits) passes both schema and policy validation and compiles to 3 Argo Workflows and 3 Kueue Jobs. 

Structural errors: Four categories of structurally invalid plans were rejected at schema validation (Stage 1). Three of the four are independently caught by policy as well—empty 

mission_id (Rule 1), download without visibility (Rule 8), and download with services (Rule 7)—demonstrating the layered schema–policy coverage of Section II-B ; only acquisition without instrument is schema-exclusive. 

Semantic errors: Three categories of semantic violations passed schema validation but were flagged by OPA policy (Rules 4, 6, 10). A Pydantic model_validator could express these checks (the schema already uses one for the download-event constraints, Table IV), so we place them in the Rego policy not for expressiveness but for governance: the policy can be executed and audited standalone by a reviewer who never runs the compiler (Section II-B). 

B. Compilation Performance and Scaling 

Table V shows phase-wise compilation times for synthetic mission plans with 10 to 1000 acquisition events (3 steps each), measured on an Intel Core i5-7400 @ 3.00 GHz (single core, Ubuntu 24.04, Python 3.12.3, OPA 1.15.1), mean of 30 iterations. Parse and total time scale near-linearly; parse (YAML + Pydantic) dominates at large sizes (its share grows from 41.8% at 10 events to 86.9% at 1000) while the OPA subprocess scales sub-linearly (18.8 ms → 115 ms), its per-call cost being a large fixed component (process spawn and policy load) plus a smaller input-proportional term. The sub-100 ms compile and render phases carry large relative variance because this host also runs a single-node kubeadm cluster; background control-plane load on this shared host, rather than the compiler, likely drives that jitter, so we read them as order-of-magnitude costs. A 1000-event plan with 3000 steps compiles in about 1.5 seconds, dominated by the pure-Python YAML load. Benchmarking OPA against an in-process Python validator ( baseline_validator.py ) that re-implements the ten rules and reproduces OPA’s decision on the entire ablation corpus (fourteen cases spanning valid, schema-only, policy-only, and both-layer inputs), the latter runs in 0.02–1.0 ms versus 17–120 ms in the same paired run. This run is separate from Table V, so its OPA figures differ from that table’s 18.8–115 ms through ordinary run-to-run variance on the shared host. The gap over the in-process baseline (870 × at 10 events, 120 × at 1000) is largest where that fixed per-call overhead dominates; a long-lived OPA server or embedded engine would remove the fixed component while preserving standalone auditability. We keep the subprocess model because ∼120 ms is negligible beside parse; the baseline TABLE IV CASE STUDY : E RROR DETECTION ACROSS PLAN CATEGORIES 

Category Example Error Sch. Pol. Notes Valid (ORCHIDE, 3 events) None ✓ ✓ 3 Argo WFs + 3 Kueue Jobs Struct: DL w/o visibility visibility=false ✓ ✓ Both (Rule 8) Struct: ACQ w/o instrument Missing instrument ✓ – Schema-only Struct: empty mission_id mission_id="" ✓ ✓ Both (Rule 1) Struct: DL with services Services on DL event ✓ ✓ Both layers catch Semantic: invalid landscape_type landscape_type=desert – ✓ Rule 10: unknown value Semantic: GPU no fallback No fallback_class – ✓ Rule 4: safety Semantic: CPU+accel cpu +accel – ✓ Rule 6: within-step                                     

> TABLE V PHASE -W ISE COMPILATION TIME (MS ,MEAN ±STD )
> Events Parse OPA Compile Render Total 10 14.1 ±3.9 18.8 ±3.2 0.2 ±0.0 0.5 ±0.3 33.7 ±6.4 50 64.6 ±10.8 21.5 ±3.9 0.9 ±0.1 2.4 ±1.3 89.4 ±13.7 100 127 ±727.7 ±4.0 1.8 ±0.4 5.2 ±2.0 162 ±8500 641 ±16 68.4 ±6.1 11.2 ±6.5 28.4 ±7.7 749 ±19 1000 1323 ±36 115 ±520.9 ±9.2 62.7 ±14.5 1522 ±44

is a performance reference and equivalence oracle, not a rejected design. 

C. Defense-in-Depth Analysis 

Whereas Table IV in Section V-A shows specific example errors for each constraint category, Table VI below summarizes, for eight representative constraint categories, which layer catches each independently of the example workload. Three of the eight are enforced by both layers; the structural Rules 1 and 2 ( mission_id , event count) are two further schema–policy overlaps not tabulated in this event/service/step-level subset. If the schema layer were removed, seven of eight constraint categories would still be caught by policy. If the policy layer were removed, four semantic constraints (GPU fallback, CPU acceleration contradiction, priority validation, and landscape type) would go unchecked.  

> TABLE VI DEFENSE -IN -D EPTH : S CHEMA VS . P OLICY OVERLAP

Constraint Sch. Pol. Both ACQ needs instrument ✓ – –DL no services ✓ ✓ ✓

DL needs visibility ✓ ✓ ✓

Service ≥1 step ✓ ✓ ✓

GPU/FPGA needs fallback – ✓ –CPU contradicts accel – ✓ –Priority ̸ = 0 – ✓ –Landscape recognized – ✓ –

D. Live Cluster Validation 

We validated rendered artifacts on a live single-node K8s v1.35.1 cluster (8 CPU, 32 GiB, NVIDIA RTX 5080 GPU) running Argo v4.0.1 and Kueue v0.17.0. Four experiments are reported in this subsection; a fifth experiment, exercising the explicit DRA Template Path on the same host after a platform upgrade, is presented in Section V-E. 

Argo sequential DAG: A three-step CPU-only mission plan was compiled and submitted. All steps executed in correct DAG order, completing with Succeeded 3/3. 

Real GPU allocation: A mission plan with a CUDA con-tainer ( nvidia/cuda:13.0.0-base-ubuntu22.04 ) was compiled and submitted using DRA via the gpu.nvidia.com DeviceClass. The GPU step executed nvidia-smi , confirming RTX 5080 al-location (16,303 MiB, CUDA 13.0, Driver 580.126). Workflow completed Succeeded 3/3. 

GPU path comparison: The same CUDA container was submitted twice: once with a DRA ResourceClaim (output: 

PATH=GPU , RTX 5080 detected) and once without (output: 

PATH=CPU-FALLBACK , no GPU device). This shows that DRA claims control GPU device visibility and that the runtime fallback path works end-to-end. 

Kueue quota contention: Two CPU Jobs (priority 90 and 50) were submitted simultaneously to a ClusterQueue with CPU quota 4. Each requested 3 CPUs (combined 6 >4), so Kueue admitted the first and suspended the second. Upon completion, the second was automatically admitted within 1 second. Both completed successfully. 

E. DRA-Backed GPU Admission on a Live Cluster 

To demonstrate that Kueue-rendered Job artifacts compose correctly with the DRA path on a recent stable Kueue release, we ran a quota-and-admission experiment that exercises both layers (DRA device binding by the scheduler and ClusterQueue quota accounting by Kueue) on a single-device GPU queue. 

Setup: The experiment ran on a single-node host kubeadm Kubernetes v1.36.1 cluster with one NVIDIA GeForce GT 1030 device, Cilium CNI, Multus secondary CNI, and the NVIDIA DRA driver [12], which NVIDIA donated to the Cloud Native Computing Foundation at KubeCon EU 2026 [42]; the GT 1030 is used purely as a DRA-allocatable device whose role is to exercise Kueue’s quota-and-binding cycle (no GPU-compute workload is run against it). The same physical host previously ran the experiments in Section V-D at Kubernetes v1.35.1 with an RTX 5080; reproducing the experiment in this subsection requires only Kubernetes v1.36.1 and a single DRA-allocatable GPU. Kueue v0.17.3 [6], [7] ran with the 

DRAExtendedResources and DynamicResourceAllocation feature gates enabled on the controller-manager and a Configuration ConfigMap whose deviceClassMappings entry bound the DRA DeviceClass gpu.nvidia.com to a logical resource name dra. gpu.nvidia.com [11]. A ClusterQueue was provisioned covering 

cpu , memory , and dra.gpu.nvidia.com , with nominalQuota of one GPU. 

Methodology: Two Kubernetes Jobs were submitted simulta-neously to the LocalQueue backing the ClusterQueue. Each Pod declared a resourceClaims entry pointing to a single-GPU ResourceClaimTemplate and a container that referenced the claim via resources.claims ; the template requested one device from deviceClassName:gpu.nvidia.com . We checked four properties: (i) at most one non-Finished Workload is in Admitted=True at any time (the Admitted status is monotone and persists after Finished=True ; quota release is bound to 

Finished , not to clearing Admitted ); (ii) the second Workload remains pending until quota is released; (iii) Kueue accounts the allocation against the deviceClassMappings logical resource so 

flavorsUsage[dra.gpu.nvidia.com]=1 ; (iv) upon completion of the first Job, the queued Workload transitions to Admitted=True 

without operator intervention, the DRA driver instantiates a fresh ResourceClaim (state=allocated, reserved ), and the second Job runs to completion. 

Results: Both Jobs were accepted by the API server. At submis-sion both Workloads were Suspended ( pending=2,admitted=0 ); within ∼10 seconds Kueue admitted one (pending=1, admitted=1,flavorsUsage[dra.gpu.nvidia.com]=1 ). The first Job logged job-1 starting at 18:04:15 and job-1 done at 18:04:45 ; the queued Workload then transitioned to 

Admitted=True after a ∼5-second cascade gap (wall-clock between job-1 container exit and job-2 container start; not decomposed by stage), with a freshly created ResourceClaim 

bound to the GT 1030. The second Job logged job-2 starting at 18:04:50 and job-2 done at 18:05:20 . Final state: both Workloads Admitted=True,Finished=True ; both Jobs Complete 1/1 . All four properties held without manual reconciliation. 

Scope of this result: What was validated is the explicit DRA Template Path: a per-Pod ResourceClaim created from a 

ResourceClaimTemplate , its quota accounted via deviceClass Mappings , and the admission cascade triggered on first-Job completion. The experiment does not measure scheduling fairness beyond two contestants and does not exercise multi-class device flavors (e.g., mixed FPGA+GPU). The setup is for Kueue v0.17.3; in v0.18 the corresponding gates were renamed to KueueDRAIntegration (Beta, default-on) and Kueue DRAIntegrationExtendedResource (Alpha, default-off), with the legacy DynamicResourceAllocation /DRAExtendedResources 

names deprecated and locked-to-default in v0.18 and scheduled for removal in v0.19 [11]. Section V-F re-validates the renderer against the renamed KueueDRAIntegration gate on v0.18.3 and extends this single-class result to a unified GPU+CPU quota with a scheduler-level accelerator fallback. 

Reproducibility: The Configuration patch, ClusterQueue+ LocalQueue+ResourceFlavor, ResourceClaimTemplate , and the two-Job manifest are committed at manifests/k8s/kueue/ dra-paper-test/ as files 00 through 03, with the captured ex-perimental output in docs/experiments/2026-06-09-dra-quota-cascade-output.md . The deterministic CPU pipeline checks (schema, policy, render, Argo submit and completion, Kueue Job render and admission, Kueue Job completion) are exercised by scripts/validate_live_cluster.sh on the CPU mission plan configs/mission_plans/validation_live_cluster.yaml ,returning PASS: 13 FAIL: 0 .

F. Unified GPU+CPU DRA and Scheduler-Level Fallback 

The Section V-E experiment counted a single GPU device class under one ClusterQueue. This subsection extends that result in three directions on the same host after upgrading Kueue to v0.18.3 [8] (Kubernetes v1.36.1, one NVIDIA Quadro K2200 in the single-DRA-allocatable-GPU role of Sec-tion V-E , and kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-cpu [9] publishing a dra.cpu DeviceClass): (i) a unified quota that counts a CPU device class alongside the GPU class; (ii) a scheduler-level 

accelerator fallback that replaces the runtime environment-variable switch of Section V-D ; and (iii) the empirical boundary between them. On v0.18.3 the DRA integration is governed by the KueueDRAIntegration gate (Beta, default-on), so no explicit feature-gate flag is required; this re-validates the renderer against the renamed gates that Section V-E left open. 

Unified quota (both classes counted). We extended the Configuration deviceClassMappings to bind gpu.nvidia.com to 

dra.gpu.nvidia.com and dra.cpu to a second logical resource 

dra.cpu , and provisioned a ClusterQueue covering both plus 

cpu and memory . Two Jobs each claiming one dra.cpu device through an exactly request reproduced the Section V-E cascade for the CPU class: Kueue admitted the first ( flavorsUsage[ dra.cpu]=1 ) and gated the second with the explicit reason “insufficient unused quota for dra.cpu . . . 1 more needed,” then cascade-admitted it on completion. The GPU cascade of Section V-E reproduced identically on v0.18.3 ( flavorsUsage[ dra.gpu.nvidia.com]=1 ). Each accelerator class thus carries its own logical quota under a single ClusterQueue, subject to the boundary below. 

Scheduler-level fallback ( firstAvailable ). Kubernetes DRA expresses “prefer GPU, else CPU” declaratively through a 

firstAvailable ResourceClaim request—a prioritized subre-quest list that graduated to stable in Kubernetes v1.36 (KEP-4816 [10]). This is a scheduler-level decision, in contrast to the Section V-D runtime switch in which the container inspects an environment variable at start-up. Two identical plain Pods, each referencing one firstAvailable[gpu.nvidia. com,dra.cpu] claim, demonstrated the fallback: the first bound the K2200 ( device=gpu-0 , driver gpu.nvidia.com ) and the second, finding the GPU taken, fell back to a CPU device (device=cpudevnuma000 , driver dra.cpu )—same specification, the scheduler choosing. The compiler emits this claim under an opt-in --dra-fallback flag for a step whose primary and fallback resource classes are both driver-backed; FPGA is deliberately excluded, as no FPGA DRA driver exists. Upstream KEP-4816 examples prioritize tiers within one GPU driver; we did not find an upstream example demonstrating this cross-driver GPU →CPU form, so it is an application the specification permits rather than one it illustrates. 

The boundary ( firstAvailable is not admissible under Kueue). Kueue quota counting supports only exactly device requests [11]. Submitting the same firstAvailable claim as a Kueue Job makes the boundary concrete: Kueue rejects the Workload as Inadmissible ( QuotaReserved=False, reason= Inadmissible ) with the message “ ResourceClaimTemplate . . . : FirstAvailable device selection is not supported”; the Job stays Suspended and nothing is quota-counted. We observed the identical rejection on both Kueue v0.17.3 and v0.18.3, so it is a property of the integration rather than of one release. The two mechanisms are therefore disjoint under current Kueue: the scheduler-level firstAvailable fallback lives off the admission path (a plain Pod or the Argo route), while a Kueue-admitted Job uses an exactly claim. The renderer reflects this boundary: for a Kueue Job it emits an exactly gpu.nvidia.com claim (which Kueue quota-counts) and never a firstAvailable claim; applying the renderer’s --dra-fallback output to the live queue yielded an admitted, quota-counted Workload ( Admitted=True ), confirming the path end-to-end. 

Reproducibility. The Configuration patch, ClusterQueue, both ResourceClaimTemplate s, and the three demonstrations (unified CPU cascade, firstAvailable fallback Pods, and 

firstAvailable -under-Kueue rejection) are committed at 

manifests/k8s/kueue/dra-unified/ , with captured output un-der results-v0.18.3-20260716/ . The dra-driver-cpu install carries a documented kubelet-root-dir path fix—a local workaround for a Helm-chart limitation that remains open upstream. 

G. Test Suite and Static Validation 

The test suite spans every stage of the pipeline (schema validation, policy evaluation, compilation, rendering both sequential and parallel, the command-line interface, MCP tools and security, interface contracts, continuous integration, and Docker) and exercises all ten policy rules directly: the in-process baseline reproduces OPA’s accept/reject decision across the entire ablation corpus, so every rule is checked at the decision level rather than only by line execution. In a fresh environment lacking OPA or a live cluster, the OPA- and cluster-dependent cases skip and the remainder pass; the full suite passes with the local OPA binary and a live single-node kubeadm cluster. Continuous integration runs the suite as a merge gate. Golden evaluation fixtures verify end-to-end compilation correctness by comparing actual WorkflowIntent output against expected JSON. Rendered Argo Workflow YAML is validated by argo lint [22] locally; CI runs Python-based manifest structure checks when the Argo CLI is unavailable. 

H. Security 

MCP path traversal protection is tested with six attack vectors including absolute paths, .. traversal, directory components, and prefix bypass. OPA subprocess timeout is tested for CWE-400 mitigation. VI. L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

FPGA, mixed-accelerator, and multi-class DRA policies remain future work; DRA-backed GPU admission with single-device quota is documented in Section V-E . All test mission plans were author-constructed; validation against real satellite operator mission plans would strengthen external validity. The system does not implement radiation hardening, full high availability (HA), or over-the-air (OTA) update guarantees, and does not implement security controls in the NIST SP 800-53 sense (Section II-B ); it complements onboard platforms rather than replacing them. Because landscape_type is optional (Sec-tion III-H , Rule 10), a service that omits it while nonetheless depending on landscape context is admitted by both layers— the omission is indistinguishable at compile time from “not applicable,” and catching it would require runtime context the ground-side compiler lacks. ORCHIDE’s archival paper [41] identifies its own ground-side SDK as ongoing work. 

Accelerator fallback and Kueue admission.: The scheduler-level firstAvailable fallback and Kueue quota accounting are disjoint under current Kueue (Section V-F ): Kueue rejects a firstAvailable claim as Inadmissible and quota-counts only exactly requests, so expressing accelerator fallback and Kueue quota within a single claim awaits upstream Kueue support. The CPU DRA path depends on kubernetes-sigs/ dra-driver-cpu [9], which is pre-beta, and on a local kubelet-root-dir workaround for a Helm-chart limitation still open upstream; these are integration constraints of the current driver ecosystem rather than properties of the compiler. The cross-driver GPU →CPU firstAvailable form, while permitted by KEP-4816, is not illustrated by upstream examples, so its portability across DRA drivers remains to be established. 

Generalization beyond ORCHIDE.: The framework treats ORCHIDE as the inaugural case study, not as a hard cou-pling. The Pydantic schema, the Rego policy package, and the Argo/Kueue renderer are independent modules; another operator’s plan format can replace the schema, that operator’s flight rules can replace or augment the policy package, and an alternative onboard runtime (for example, MicroShift [31] Jobs on AxDCU-1-class hardware, or raw CWL via Calris-sian [27] for an EOEPCA-aligned deployment) can replace the renderer without disturbing the compilation pipeline. The author-imposed safety rules (rows marked ‘A’ in Table II) are designed to carry over directly (priority bounds, fallback-class requirements, and CPU/accelerator-coherence checks are not ORCHIDE-specific), though no second renderer is yet demonstrated, so this modularity is a design property, not an evaluated result. Unlike admission-time validators (OPA Gatekeeper [24], or Kubernetes-native CEL admission policies) that check rendered Kubernetes objects at API-server admission, this compiler checks mission-plan domain semantics before any Kubernetes object exists; the two are complementary. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented an open-source ground-side compiler that addresses the mission plan validation and compilation gap identified in onboard satellite platforms like ORCHIDE. The system applies OPA/Rego policy-as-code and Kueue-compatible rendering to satellite mission plans, producing Argo Workflow and Kueue Job artifacts verified through static lint checks and live cluster submission. A case study demonstrated that the layered validation approach catches both structural errors (at schema parse time) and semantic violations (via OPA policy), with end-to-end compilation scaling near-linearly (parse-dominated at scale) from 34 ms (10 events) to 1.5 s (1000 events). The tool is available under EUPL-1.2 at 

https://github.com/thc1006/satellite-mission-compiler (tag v0.4.2, DOI 10.5281/zenodo.21228150). ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported in part by the Center for Intelligent Team Robotics and Human-Robot Collaboration under the “Top Research Centers in Taiwan Key Fields Program” of the Ministry of Education (MOE), Taiwan, and in part by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under grants 115-2221-E-A49-004 and 115-2640-E-011-003. REFERENCES [1] A. K. Hankache and S. Weisz, “Bringing cloud-native PaaS to space: Onboard edge computing for satellites,” presented at KubeCon +CloudNativeCon Europe, Amsterdam, Mar. 2026. [2] ORCHIDE Consortium, “Overall ORCHIDE solution architecture and design,” Horizon Europe Project #101135595 deliverable D3.1, issue 003, Jul. 2024. [3] ORCHIDE Consortium, “State of the art of edge computing orchestration and unikernels technologies,” Horizon Europe Project #101135595 deliverable D2.2, May 2024. [4] A. K. Hankache, A. Castanie, L. R. Medina, V. Robles, and S. Weisz, “On-board data processing orchestrator,” presented at the 2nd European Data Handling & Data Processing Conference (EDHPC 2025), ESA/ESTEC, Elche, Spain, Oct. 13–17, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://indico.esa.i nt/event/552/contributions/11150/ [5] T. Hinrichs, T. Sandall, and T. Koponen, “Open Policy Agent,” CNCF Graduated Project. [Online]. Available: https://www.openpolicyagent.org/ [6] A. Gharaibeh and A. Culquicondor, “Kueue: Kubernetes-native job queue-ing,” Kubernetes SIGs. [Online]. Available: https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/ [7] Kubernetes SIGs, “Release v0.17.3,” Kueue GitHub release, May 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/ta g/v0.17.3 [8] Kubernetes SIGs, “Release v0.18.3,” Kueue GitHub release, July 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/ta g/v0.18.3 [9] Kubernetes SIGs, “dra-driver-cpu: a Dynamic Resource Allocation driver for CPUs,” GitHub repository. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/k ubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-cpu [10] Kubernetes, “KEP-4816: DRA: Prioritized Alternatives in Device Re-quests,” Kubernetes Enhancements (Stable in Kubernetes v1.36). [Online]. Available: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/ sig-scheduling/4816-dra-prioritized-list [11] Kubernetes SIGs, “Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) with Ex-tendedResources,” Kueue documentation. [Online]. Available: https: //kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/dynamic_resource_allocation/ [12] Kubernetes SIGs, “DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs,” open-source project (previously at https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver-gpu, relocated to the kubernetes-sigs organization in 2026). [Online]. Available: https: //github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu [13] Volcano Community, “Volcano: A cloud native batch system for high-performance workloads,” CNCF Incubating Project. [Online]. Available: https://volcano.sh/ [14] Y. Xiong, Y. Sun, L. Xing, and Y. Huang, “Extend cloud to edge with KubeEdge,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Symp. Edge Computing (SEC) , 2018. [15] Z. Zhao, J. Wu, S. Su, W. Zhu, and Y. Gao, “KubeSpace: A low-latency and stable control plane for LEO satellite container orchestration,” arXiv:2601.21383, Jan. 2026. [16] V. Bhosale, A. Gavrilovska, and K. Bhardwaj, “Krios: Scheduling abstractions and mechanisms for enabling a LEO compute cloud,” in 

Proc. ACM Symp. Cloud Computing (SoCC) , 2024. [17] T. Pfandzelter and D. Bermbach, “Komet: A serverless platform for low-Earth orbit edge services,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Cloud Computing (SoCC) , 2024. arXiv:2410.05973. [18] Nubificus, “urunc: A lightweight OCI-compatible unikernel runtime,” CNCF Sandbox Project. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/urunc-dev/urunc [19] S. Colvin, “Pydantic: Data validation using Python type annotations.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.pydantic.dev/ [20] Anthropic, “Model Context Protocol specification.” [Online]. Available: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/ [21] J. Lowin, “FastMCP: A Python framework for MCP servers.” [Online]. Available: https://gofastmcp.com/ [22] Argo Project, “Argo Workflows: Container-native workflow engine for Kubernetes,” CNCF Graduated Project. [Online]. Available: https://argo proj.github.io/ [23] Rancher Labs, “K3s: Lightweight Kubernetes.” [Online]. Available: https: //k3s.io/ [24] Open Policy Agent, “Gatekeeper: Policy controller for Kubernetes.” [Online]. Available: https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/ [25] NIST, “Security and privacy controls for information systems and organizations,” NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 5, Sep. 2020. [26] R. Braden, “Requirements for Internet hosts,” RFC 1123, IETF, Oct. 1989. [27] ESA, “EOEPCA+: Earth Observation Exploitation Platform Common Architecture.” [Online]. Available: https://eoepca.org/ [28] Kratos Defense, “OpenSpace platform for multi-mission ground systems.” [Online]. Available: https://www.kratosdefense.com/ [29] CCSDS, “Mission planning and scheduling,” Green Book, CCSDS 529.0-G-1, Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org/Pubs/529x0g1.pdf [30] T. Fruth, C. Lenzen, E. Gross, and F. Mrowka, “The EnMAP mission planning system,” in Space Operations: Inspiring Humankind’s Future ,Springer, 2019. [31] Red Hat, “Red Hat teams up with Axiom Space to launch, optimize the space company’s Data Center Unit-1 on orbit,” press release, Mar. 6, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.redhat.com/en/about/press-releases/red-hat-teams-axiom-space-launch-optimize-axiom-spaces-data-center-unit-1-orbit [32] Kepler Communications, “Kepler deploys first space-based, scalable cloud infrastructure powered by NVIDIA,” press release, Mar. 16, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://kepler.space/kepler-deploys-first-space-based-scalable-cloud-infrastructure-powered-by-nvidia/ [33] L. G. Gutierrez, J. A. Tejo, A. Cendrero, M. Pereda, J. Saiz, C. Hernandez, D. de Miguel, and T. W. Beech, “Off-the-shelf mission planning is possible: FlexPlan does it,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Aerospace Conference ,Big Sky, MT, USA, Mar. 2005. DOI: 10.1109/AERO.2005.1559706. [34] M. Maimone, S. Maxwell, J. Biesiadecki, and S. Algermissen, “RP-check: an architecture for spaceflight command sequence validation,” in 

Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference , Big Sky, MT, USA, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8396785/ [35] OpenC3, “COSMOS open-source mission-operations framework,” Enter-prise edition documentation (Helm/K8s deployment). [Online]. Available: https://openc3.com/enterprise/ [36] NASA Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, “Software assurance and software safety standard,” NASA Technical Standard NASA-STD-8739.8B, Sep. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://standards.nasa.gov/stand ard/NASA/NASA-STD-87398 [37] N. G. Leveson, Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2011. [38] ORCHIDE Consortium, “Communication plan (D6.1),” Horizon Europe Project #101135595 deliverable, May 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //orchide-project.eu/deliverables/orchide-d6.1.pdf [39] ORCHIDE Consortium, “Website and dissemination tools (D6.2),” Horizon Europe Project #101135595 deliverable, May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://orchide-project.eu/deliverables/orchide-d6.2.pdf [40] S. Weisz, “ORCHIDE: using EOS for space edge computing,” CERN Indico EOS 2026 Workshop, Mar. 11, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //indico.cern.ch/event/1622471/contributions/6910807/ [41] S. Weisz et al. , “ORCHIDE: Bringing Unikernels to an Orchestra-tor near You,” Future Internet , vol. 18, no. 6, p. 299, Jun. 2026. DOI: 10.3390/fi18060299. [42] J. Boitano, “Advancing Open Source AI, NVIDIA Donates Dynamic Resource Allocation Driver for GPUs to Kubernetes Community,” NVIDIA Blog, Mar. 24, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.nv idia.com/blog/nvidia-at-kubecon-2026/ [43] ORCHIDE Consortium, “Creating unikernel data processing workflows,” ORCHIDE YouTube channel (@ORCHIDE-EU), Jun. 18, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFOWgbJRvXQ (accessed Jun. 2026) [44] J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Liu, L. Kuang, and J. Lu, “YUHENG-OS: A cloud-native space cluster operating system,” arXiv:2603.27946, Mar. 2026. [45] A. K. Erol and D. Mahajan, “Equinox: Decentralized scheduling for hardware-aware orbital intelligence,” arXiv:2604.19958, Apr. 2026. [46] H. Tabatabaee Malazi, R. Farahani, N. Mohan, and S. Dustdar, “Orches-trating serverless applications in the edge cloud space continuum: What breaks and what is next?,” arXiv:2605.04316, May 2026. [47] M. Tejedor, M. Grossi, C. Tüysüz, R. Rocha, and S. Val-lecorsa, “Kubernetes-orchestrated hybrid quantum-classical workflows,” arXiv:2603.24206, Mar. 2026. [48] R. Farahani, M. Colosi, I. Murturi, S. Nastic, M. Villari, S. Dustdar, and R. Prodan, “ClusterLess: Deadline-aware serverless workflow orchestration on federated edge clusters,” arXiv:2605.04310, May 2026. [49] H. Kim, A. Das, S. Ghosh, A. Raha, and V. Raghunathan, “BIDENT: Heterogeneous operator-level mapping for efficient edge inference,” arXiv:2606.05271, Jun. 2026. [50] B. Soret, A. M. Mercado-Martínez, A. Jurado-Navas, N. D. Lyholm, M. Moretti, P. Popovski, and I. Leyva-Mayorga, “Edge intelligence for satellite-based Earth observation: Scheduling image acquisition and processing,” arXiv:2604.05937, Apr. 2026. [51] P. L. Foalem, F. Khomh, L. Da Silva, and E. Merlo, “An empirical study of policy-as-code adoption in open-source software projects,” arXiv:2601.05555, Jan. 2026.